                                  The Electric

                               Kool-Aid Acid Test

                    This edition contains the complete text

                       of the original hardcover edition.

                         NOT ONE WORD HAS BEEN OMITTED.

                        The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test

     A Bantam Book / published by arrangement with Farrar, Straus & Giroux

                               PUBLISHING HISTORY

       Farrar, Straus & Giroux hardcover edition published in August 1968
                Literary Guild edition published in August 1968

   Bantam mass market edition / October 1969 Bantam trade paperback edition /
                                  October 1999

    Parts of several chapters of this book appeared, in very different form,
                                  in the world

   journal tribunes Sunday magazine, new york, in January and February 1967,

               (c) 1967 by the World Journal Tribune Corporation.

                              All rights reserved.

                        Copyright (c) 1968 by Tom Wolfe.

       Cover design copyright (c) 1999 by Belina Huey and Susan Mitchell.

               Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 68-13008.

          No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any

           form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including

           photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and

      retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.

               For information address: Farrar, Straus & Giroux,

                19 Union Square West, New York, New York 10003.

                               ISBN 0-553-38064-8

            Published simultaneously in the United States and Canada

   Bantam Books are published by Bantam Books, a division of Random House,
       Inc. Its trademark, consisting of the words "Bantam Books" and the
   portrayal of a rooster, is Registered in U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
   and in other countries. Marca Registrada. Bantam Books, 1540 Broadway, New
                             York, New York 10036.

                    PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

                            20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13

                                    Contents

   I Black Shiny FBI Shoes / 1

   II The Bladder Totem / 16

   III The Electric Suit / 24

   IV What Do You Think of My Buddha? / 32

   V The Rusky-Dusky Neon Dust / 55

   VI The Bus / 67

   VII Unauthorized Acid / 87

   VIII Tootling the Multitudes / 99

   IX The Crypt Trip / 104

   X Dream Wars / 108

   XI The Unspoken Thing / 124

   XII The Bust / 149

   XIII The Hell's Angels / 167

   XIV A Miracle in Seven Days / 182 XV Cloud / 198

   XVI The Frozen Jug Band / 214

   XVII Departures / 227

   XVIII Cosmo's Tasmanian Deviltry / 229

   XIX The Trips Festival / 249

   XX The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test / 266

   XXI The Fugitive / 286

   XXII !Diablo! / 305

   XXIII The Red Tide / 310

   XXIV The Mexican Bust / 325

   XXV Secret Agent Number One / 331

   XXVI The Cops and Robbers Game / 346

   XXVII The Graduation / 371 Epilogue / 413

                                  The Electric

                               Kool-Aid Acid Test

                                    Chapter

                                       I

                                  Black Shiny

                                   FBI Shoes

   That's good thinking there, cool breeze, cool breeze is a kid with three
   or four days' beard sitting next to me on the stamped metal bottom of the
   open back part of a pickup truck. Bouncing along. Dipping and rising and
   rolling on these rotten springs like a boat. Out the back of the truck the
   city of San Francisco is bouncing down the hill, all those endless
   staggers of bay windows, slums with a view, bouncing and streaming down
   the hill. One after another, electric signs with neon martini glasses lit
   up on them, the San Francisco symbol of "bar"-thousands of neon-magenta
   martini glasses bouncing and streaming down the hill, and beneath them
   hundreds, thousands of people wheeling around to look at this freaking
   crazed truck we're in, their white faces erupting from their lapels like
   marshmallows-streaming and bouncing down the hill-and God knows they've
   got plenty to look at.

   That's why it strikes me as funny when Cool Breeze says very seriously
   over the whole roar of the thing, "I don't know-when Kesey gets out I
   don't know if I can come around the Warehouse."

   "Why not?"

   "Well, like the cops are going to be coming around like all feisty, and
   I'm on probation, so I don't know."

   Well, that's good thinking there, Cool Breeze. Don't rouse the bastids.
   Lie low-like right now. Right now Cool Breeze is so terrified of the law
   he is sitting up in plain view of thousands of already startled citizens
   wearing some kind of Seven Dwarfs Black Forest gnome's hat covered in
   feathers and fluorescent colors. Kneeling in the truck, facing us, also in
   plain view, is a half-Ottawa Indian girl named Lois Jennings, with her
   head thrown back and a radiant look on her face. Also a blazing silver
   disk in the middle of her forehead alternately exploding with light when
   the sun hits it or sending off rainbows from the defraction lines in it.
   And, oh yeah, there's a long-barreled Colt .45 revolver in her hand, only
   nobody on the street can tell it's a cap pistol as she pegs away, kheeew,
   kheeew, at the erupting marshmallow faces like Debra Paget in ... in ...

   -Kesey's coming out of jail!

   Two more things they are looking at out there are a sign on the rear
   bumper reading "Custer Died for Your Sins" and, at the wheel, Lois's
   enamorado Stewart Brand, a thin blond guy with a blazing disk on his
   forehead too, and a whole necktie made of Indian beads. No shirt, however,
   just an Indian bead necktie on bare skin and a white butcher's coat with
   medals from the King of Sweden on it.

   Here comes a beautiful one, attache case and all, the day-is-done
   resentful look and the ... shoes-how they shine!-and what the hell are
   these beatnik ninnies-and Lois plugs him in the old marshmallow and he
   goes streaming and bouncing down the hill...

   And the truck heaves and billows, blazing silver red and Day-Glo, and I
   doubt seriously, Cool Breeze, that there is a single cop in all of San
   Francisco today who does not know that this crazed vehicle is a guerrilla
   patrol from the dread LSD.

   The cops now know the whole scene, even the costumes, the jesuschrist
   strung-out hair, Indian beads, Indian headbands, donkey beads, temple
   bells, amulets, mandalas, god's-eyes, fluorescent vests, unicorn horns,
   Errol Flynn dueling shirts-but they still don't know about the shoes. The
   heads have a thing about shoes. The worst are shiny black shoes with
   shoelaces in them. The hierarchy ascends from there, although practically
   all lowcut shoes are unhip, from there on up to the boots the heads like,
   light, fanciful boots, English boots of the mod variety, if that is all
   they can get, but better something like hand-tooled Mexican boots with
   Caliente Dude Triple A toes on them. So see the FBI-black-shiny-laced
   up-FBI shoes-when the FBI finally grabbed Kesey-

   There is another girl in the back of the truck, a dark little girl with
   thick black hair, called Black Maria. She looks Mexican, but she says to
   me in straight soft Californian:

   "When is your birthday?"

   "March 2."

   "Pisces," she says. And then: "I would never take you for a Pisces."

   "Why?"

   "You seem too... solid for a Pisces."

   But I know she means stolid. I am beginning to feel stolid. Back in New
   York City, Black Maria, I tell you, I am even known as something of a
   dude. But somehow a blue silk blazer and a big tie with clowns on it and
   ... a ... pair of shiny lowcut black shoes don't set them all to doing the
   Varsity Rag in the head world in San Francisco. Lois picks off the
   marshmallows one by one; Cool Breeze ascends into the innards of his
   gnome's hat; Black Maria, a Scorpio herself, rummages through the Zodiac;
   Stewart Brand winds it through the streets; paillettes explode-and this is
   nothing special, just the usual, the usual in the head world of San
   Francisco, just a little routine messing up the minds of the citizenry en
   route, nothing more than psyche food for beautiful people, while giving
   some guy from New York a lift to the Warehouse to wait for the Chief, Ken
   Kesey, who is getting out of jail.

   ABOUT ALL I KNEW ABOUT KESEY AT THAT POINT WAS THAT HE was a highly
   regarded 31-year-old novelist and in a lot of trouble over drugs. He wrote
   One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1962), which was made into a play in
   1963, and Sometimes a Great Notion (1964). He was always included with
   Philip Roth and Joseph Heller and Bruce Jay Friedman and a couple of
   others as one of the young novelists who might go all the way. Then he was
   arrested twice for possession of marijuana, in April of 1965 and January
   of 1966, and fled to Mexico rather than risk a stiff sentence. It looked
   like as much as five years, as a second offender. One day I happened to
   get hold of some letters Kesey wrote from Mexico to his friend Larry
   McMurtry, who wrote Horseman, Pass By, from which the movie Hud was made.
   They were wild and ironic, written like a cross between William Burroughs
   and George Ade, telling of hideouts, disguises, paranoia, fleeing from
   cops, smoking joints and seeking satori in the Rat lands of Mexico. There
   was one passage written George Ade-fashion in the third person as a parody
   of what the straight world back there in the U.S.A. must think of him now:

   "In short, this young, handsome, successful,
   happily-married-three-lovely-children father was a fear-crazed dope fiend
   in flight to avoid prosecution on three felonies and god knows how many
   misdemeanors and seeking at the same time to sculpt a new satori from an
   old surf-in even shorter, mad as a hatter.

   "Once an athlete so valued he had been given the job of calling signals
   from the line and risen into contention for the nationwide amateur
   wrestling crown, now he didn't know if he could do a dozen pushups. Once
   possessor of a phenomenal bank account and money waving from every hand,
   now it was all his poor wife could do to scrape together eight dollars to
   send as getaway money to Mexico. But a few years previous he had been
   listed in Who's Who and asked to speak at such auspicious gatherings as
   the Wellesley Club in Dah-la and now they wouldn't even allow him to speak
   at a VDC [Vietnam Day Committee] gathering. What was it that had brought a
   man so high of promise to so low a state in so short a time? Well, the
   answer can be found in just one short word, my friends, in just one
   all-well-used syllable:

   "Dope!

   "And while it may be claimed by some of the addled advocates of these
   chemicals that our hero is known to have indulged in drugs before his
   literary success, we must point out that there was evidence of his
   literary prowess well before the advent of the so-called psychedelic into
   his life but no evidence at all of any of the lunatic thinking that we
   find thereafter ! "

   To which he added:

   "(oh yea, the wind hums

   time ago-time ago-

   the rafter drums and the walls see

   ... and there's a door to that bird

   in the sa-a-a-apling sky

   time ago by-

   Oh yeah the surf giggles

   time ago time ago

   of under things killed when

   bad was banished and all the

   doors to the birds vanished

   time ago then.)"

   I got the idea of going to Mexico and trying to find him and do a story on
   Young Novelist Real-Life Fugitive. I started asking around about where he
   might be in Mexico. Everybody on the hip circuit in New York knew for
   certain. It seemed to be the thing to know this summer. He is in Puerto
   Vallarta. He is in Ajijic. He is in Oaxaca. He is in San Miguel de
   Allende. He is in Paraguay. He just took a steamboat from Mexico to
   Canada. And everyone knew for certain.

   I was still asking around when Kesey sneaked back into the U.S. in October
   and the FBI caught up with him on the Bayshore freeway south of San
   Francisco. An agent chased him down an embankment and caught him and Kesey
   was in jail. So I flew to San Francisco. I went straight to the San Mateo
   County jail in Redwood City and the scene in the waiting room there was
   more like the stage door at the Music Box Theatre. It was full of cheerful
   anticipation. There was a young psychologist there, Jim Fadiman-Clifton
   Fadiman's nephew, it turned out-and Jim and his wife Dorothy were happily
   stuffing three I Ching coins into the spine of some interminable dense
   volume of Oriental mysticism and they asked me to get word to Kesey that
   the coins were in there. There was also a little roundfaced brunette named
   Marilyn who told me she used to be a teenie grouper hanging out with a
   rock 'n' roll group called The Wild Flowers but now she was mainly with
   Bobby Petersen. Bobby Petersen was not a musician. He was a saint, as
   nearly as I could make out. He was in jail down in Santa Cruz trying to
   fight a marijuana charge on the grounds that marijuana was a religious
   sacrament for him. I didn't figure out exactly why she was up here in the
   San Mateo jail waiting room instead except that it was like a stage door,
   as I said, with Kesey as the star who was still inside.

   There was a slight hassle with the jailers over whether I was to get in to
   see him or not. The cops had nothing particularly to gain by letting me
   in. A reporter from New York-that just meant more publicity for this
   glorified beatnik. That was the line on Kesey. He was a glorified beatnik
   up on two dope charges, and why make a hero out of him. I must say that
   California has smooth cops. They all seem to be young, tall, crewcut,
   blond, with bleached blue eyes, like they just stepped out of a cigarette
   ad. Their jailhouses don't look like jailhouses, at least not the

   parts the public sees. They are all blond wood, fluorescent lights and
   filing-cabinet-tan metal, like the Civil Service exam room in a new Post
   Office building. The cops all speak soft Californian and are neat and
   correct as an ice cube. By the book; so they finally let me in to see
   Kesey during visiting hours. I had ten minutes. I waved goodbye to Marilyn
   and the Fadimans and the jolly scene downstairs and they took me up to the
   third floor in an elevator.

   The elevator opened right onto a small visiting room. It was weird. Here
   was a lineup of four or five cubicles, like the isolation booths on the
   old TV quiz shows, each one with a thick plate-glass window and behind
   each window a prisoner in a prison blue workshirt. They were lined up like
   haddocks on ice. Outside each window ran a counter with a telephone on it.
   That's what you speak over in here. A couple of visitors are already
   hunched over the things. Then I pick out Kesey.

   He is standing up with his arms folded over his chest and his eyes focused
   in the distance, i.e., the wall. He has thick wrists and big forearms, and
   the way he has them folded makes them look gigantic. He looks taller than
   he really is, maybe because of his neck. He has a big neck with a pair of
   sternocleido-mastoid muscles that rise up out of the prison workshirt like
   a couple of dock ropes. His jaw and chin are massive. He looks a little
   like Paul Newman, except that he is more muscular, has thicker skin, and
   he has tight blond curls boiling up around his head. His hair is almost
   gone on top, but somehow that goes all right with his big neck and general
   wrestler's build. Then he smiles slightly. It's curious, he doesn't have a
   line in his face. After all the chasing and hassling-he looks like the
   third week at the Sauna Spa; serene, as I say.

   Then I pick up my telephone and he picks up his-and this is truly Modern
   Times. We are all of twenty-four inches apart, but there is a piece of
   plate glass as thick as a telephone directory between us. We might as well
   be in different continents, talking over Videophone. The telephones are
   very crackly and lo-fi, especially considering that they have a world of
   two feet to span. Naturally it was assumed that the police monitored every
   conversation. I wanted to ask him all about his fugitive days in Mexico.
   That was still the name of my story, Young Novelist Fugitive Eight Months
   in Mexico. But he could hardly go into that on this weird hookup, and
   besides, I had only ten minutes. I take out a notebook and start asking
   him-anything. There had been a piece in the paper about his saying it was
   time for the psychedelic movement to go "beyond acid," so I asked him
   about that. Then I started scribbling like mad, in shorthand, in the
   notebook. I could see his lips moving two feet away. His voice crackled
   over the telephone like it was coming from Brisbane. The whole thing was
   crazy. It seemed like calisthenics we were going through.

   "It's my idea," he said, "that it's time to graduate from what has been
   going on, to something else. The psychedelic wave was happening six or
   eight months ago when I went to Mexico. It's been growing since then, but
   it hasn't been moving. I saw the same stuff when I got back as when I
   left. It was just bigger, that was all-" He talks in a soft voice with a
   country accent, almost a pure country accent, only crackling and rasping
   and cheese-grated over the two-foot hookup, talking about-

   "-there's been no creativity," he is saying, "and I think my value has
   been to help create the next step. I don't think there will be any
   movement off the drug scene until there is something else to move to-"

   -all in a plain country accent about something-well, to be frank, I didn't
   know what in the hell it was all about. Sometimes he spoke cryptically, in
   aphorisms. I told him I had heard he didn't intend to do any more writing.
   Why? I said.

   "I'd rather be a lightning rod than a seismograph," he said.

   He talked about something called the Acid Test and forms of expression in
   which there would be no separation between himself and the audience. It
   would be all one experience, with all the senses opened wide, words,
   music, lights, sounds, touch-lightning.

   "You mean on the order of what Andy Warhol is doing?" I said.

   ... pause. "No offense," says Kesey, "but New York is about two years
   behind."

   He said it very patiently, with a kind of country politeness, as if... I
   don't want to be rude to you fellows from the City, but there's been
   things going on out here that you would never guess in your wildest
   million years, old buddy ...

   THE TEN MINUTES WERE UP AND I WAS OUT OF THERE. I HAD gotten nothing,
   except my first brush with a strange phenomenon, that strange up-country
   charisma, the Kesey presence. I had nothing to do but kill time and hope
   Kesey would get out on bail somehow and I could talk to him and get the
   details on Novelist Fugitive in Mexico. This seemed like a very long shot
   at this time, because Kesey had two marijuana charges against him and had
   already jumped the country once.

   So I rented a car and started making the rounds in San Francisco. Somehow
   my strongest memories of San Francisco are of me in a terrific rented
   sedan roaring up hills or down hills, sliding on and off the cable-car
   tracks. Slipping and sliding down to North Beach, the fabled North Beach,
   the old fatherland bohemia of the West Coast, always full of Big Daddy
   So-and-so and Costee Plusee and long-haired little Wasp and Jewish buds
   balling spade cats-and now North Beach was dying. North Beach was nothing
   but tit shows. In the famous Beat Generation HQ, the City Lights
   bookstore, Shig Murao, the Nipponese panjandrum of the place, sat
   glowering with his beard hanging down like those strands of furze and fern
   in an architect's drawing, drooping over the volumes of Kahlil Gibran by
   the cash register while Professional Budget Finance Dentists here for the
   convention browsed in search of the beatniks between tit shows. Everything
   was The Topless on North Beach, strippers with their breasts enlarged with
   injections of silicone emulsion.

   The action-meaning the hip cliques that set the original tone-the action
   was all over in Haight-Ashbury. Pretty soon all the bellwethers of a
   successful bohemia would be there, too, the cars going through, bumper to
   bumper, with everbody rubbernecking, the tour buses going through "and
   here ... Home of the Hippies... there's one there," and the queers and
   spade hookers and bookstores and boutiques. Everything was Haight-Ashbury
   and the acid heads.

   But it was not just North Beach that was dying. The whole old-style hip
   life-jazz, coffee houses, civil rights, invite a spade for dinner,
   Vietnam-it was all suddenly dying, I found out, even among the students at
   Berkeley, across the bay from San Francisco, which had been the heart of
   the "student-rebellion" and so forth. It had even gotten to the point that
   Negroes were no longer in the hip scene, not even as totem figures. It was
   unbelievable. Spades, the very soul figures of Hip, of jazz, of the hip
   vocabulary itself, man and like and dig and baby and scarf and split and
   later and so fine, of civil rights and graduating from Reed College and
   living on North Beach, down Mason, and balling spade cats-all that good
   elaborate petting and patting and pouring soul all over the spades-all
   over, finished, incredibly.

   So I was starting to get the trend of all this heaving and convulsing in
   the bohemian world of San Francisco. Meantime, miraculously, Kesey's three
   young lawyers, Pat Hallinan, Brian Rohan, and Paul Robertson, were about
   to get Kesey out on bail. They assured the judges, in San Mateo and San
   Francisco, that Mr. Kesey had a very public-spirited project in mind. He
   had returned from exile for the express purpose of calling a huge meeting
   of heads and hippies at Winterland Arena in San Francisco in order to tell
   The Youth to stop taking LSD because it was dangerous and might french fry
   their brains, etc. It was going to be an "acid graduation" ceremony. They
   should go "beyond acid." That was what Kesey had been talking to me about,
   I guess. At the same time, six of Kesey's close friends in the Palo Alto
   area had put their homes up as security for a total of $35,000 bail with
   the San Mateo County court. I suppose the courts figured they had Kesey
   either way. If he jumped bail now, it would be such a dirty trick on his
   friends, costing them their homes, that Kesey would be discredited as a
   drug apostle or anything else. If he didn't, he would be obliged to give
   his talk to The Youth-and so much the better. In any case, Kesey was
   coming out.

   This script was not very popular in Haight-Ashbury, however. I soon found
   out that the head life in San Francisco was already such a big thing that
   Kesey's return and his acid graduation plan were causing the heads' first
   big political crisis. All eyes were on Kesey and his group, known as the
   Merry Pranksters. Thousands of kids were moving into San Francisco for a
   life based on LSD and the psychedelic thing. Thing was the major abstract
   word in Haight-Ashbury. It could mean anything, isms, life styles, habits,
   leanings, causes, sexual organs; thing and freak; freak referred to styles
   and obsessions, as in "Stewart Brand is an Indian freak" or "the
   zodiac-that's her freak," or just to heads in costume. It wasn't a
   negative word. Anyway, just a couple of weeks before, the heads had held
   their first big "be-in" in Golden Gate Park, at the foot of the hill
   leading up into Haight-Ashbury, in mock observance of the day LSD became
   illegal in California. This was a gathering of all the tribes, all the
   communal groups. All the freaks came and did their thing. A head named
   Michael Bowen started it, and thousands of them piled in, in high costume,
   ringing bells, chanting, dancing ecstatically, blowing their minds one way
   and another and making their favorite satiric gestures to the cops,
   handing them flowers, burying the bastids in tender fruity petals of love.
   Oh christ, Tom, the thing was fantastic, a freaking mind-blower, thousands
   of high-loving heads out there messing up the minds of the cops and
   everybody else in a fiesta of love and euphoria. Even Kesey, who was still
   on the run then, had brazened on in and mingled with the crowd for a
   while, and they were all one, even Kesey-and now all of a sudden here he
   is, in the hands of the FBI and other supercops, the biggest name in The
   Life, Kesey, announcing that it is time to "graduate from acid." And what
   the hell is this, a copout or what? The Stop Kesey movement was beginning
   even within the hip world.

   We pull up to the Warehouse in the crazed truck and-well, for a start, I
   begin to see that people like Lois and Stewart and Black Maria are the
   restrained, reflective wing of the Merry Pranksters. The Warehouse is on
   Harriet Street, between Howard and Folsom. Like most of San Francisco,
   Harriet Street is a lot of wooden buildings with bay windows all painted
   white. But Harriet Street is in San Francisco's Skid Row area, and despite
   all the paint, it looks like about forty winos crawled off in the shadows
   and died and turned black and bloated and exploded, sending forth a stream
   of spirochetes that got into every board, every strip, every crack, every
   splinter, every flecking flake of paint. The Warehouse actually turns out
   to be the ground-floor garage of an abandoned hotel. Its last commercial
   use was as a pie factory. We pull up to the garage and there is a panel
   truck parked just outside, painted in blue, yellow, orange, red Day-Glo,
   with the word BAM in huge letters on the hood. From out the black hole of
   the garage comes the sound of a record by Bob Dylan with his raunchy
   harmonica and Ernest Tubb voice raunching and rheuming in the old
   jack-legged chants-

   Inside is a huge chaotic space with what looks at first in the gloom like
   ten or fifteen American flags walking around. This turns out to be a bunch
   of men and women, most of them in their twenties, in white coveralls of
   the sort airport workers wear, only with sections of American flags sewn
   all over, mostly the stars against fields of blue but some with red
   stripes running down the legs. Around the side is a lot of theater
   scaffolding with blankets strewn across like curtains and whole rows of
   uprooted theater seats piled up against the walls and big cubes of metal
   debris and ropes and girders.

   One of the blanket curtains edges back and a little figure vaults down
   from a platform about nine feet up. It glows. It is a guy about five feet
   tall with some sort of World War I aviator's helmet on ... glowing with
   curves and swirls of green and orange. His boots, too; he seems to be
   bouncing over on a pair of fluorescent globes. He stops. He has a small,
   fine, ascetic face with a big mustache and huge eyes. The eyes narrow and
   he breaks into a grin.

   "I just had an eight-year-old boy up there," he says.

   Then he goes into a sniffling giggle and bounds, glowing, over into a
   corner, in among the debris.

   Everybody laughs. It is some kind of family joke, I guess. At least I am
   the only one who scans the scaffolding for the remains.

   "That's the Hermit." Three days later I see he has built a cave in the
   corner.

   A bigger glow in the center of the garage. I make out a school bus.. .
   glowing orange, green, magenta, lavender, chlorine blue, every fluorescent
   pastel imaginable in thousands of designs, both large and small, like a
   cross between Fernand Leger and Dr. Strange, roaring together and
   vibrating off each other as if somebody had given Hieronymous Bosch fifty
   buckets of Day-Glo paint and a 1939 International Harvester school bus and
   told him to go to it. On the floor by the bus is a 15-foot banner reading
   ACID TEST GRADUATION, and two or three of the Flag People are working on
   it. Bob Dylan's voice is raunching and rheuming and people are moving
   around, and babies are crying. I don't see them but they are somewhere in
   here, crying. Off to one side is a guy about 40 with a lot of muscles, as
   you can see because he has no shirt on-just a pair of khakis and some red
   leather boots on and his hell of a build-and he seems to be in a kinetic
   trance, flipping a small sledge hammer up in the air over and over, always
   managing to catch the handle on the way down with his arms and legs
   kicking out the whole time and his shoulders rolling and his head bobbing,
   all in a jerky beat as if somewhere Joe Cuba is playing "Bang Bang"
   although in fact even Bob Dylan is no longer on and out of the speaker,
   wherever it is, comes some sort of tape with a spectral voice saying:

   "... The Nowhere Mine ... we've got bubble-gum wrappers ..." some sort of
   weird electronic music behind it, with Oriental intervals, like Juan
   Carrillo's music: "... We're going to jerk it out from under the world ...
   working in the Nowhere Mine ... this day, every day ..."

   One of the Flag People comes up.

   "Hey, Mountain Girl! That's wild!"

   Mountain Girl is a tall girl, big and beautiful with dark brown hair
   falling down to her shoulders except that the lower two-thirds of her
   falling hair looks like a paint brush dipped in cadmium yellow from where
   she dyed it blond in Mexico. She pivots and shows the circle of stars on
   the back of her coveralls.

   "We got 'em at a uniform store," she says. "Aren't they great! There's
   this old guy in there, says, 'Now, you ain't gonna cut them flags up for
   costumes, are you?' And so I told him, 'Naw, we're gonna git some horns
   and have a parade.' But you see this? This is really why we got 'em."

   She points to a button on the coveralls. Everybody leans in to look. A
   motto is engraved on the bottom in art nouveau curves: "Can't Bust 'Em."

   Can't Bust 'Em!... and about time. After all the times the Pranksters have
   gotten busted, by the San Mateo County cops, the San Francisco cops, the
   Mexicale Federale cops, FBI cops, cops cops cops cops...

   And still the babies cry. Mountain Girl turns to Lois Jennings.

   "What do Indians do to stop a baby from crying?"

   "They hold its nose."

   "Yeah?"

   "They learn."

   "I'll try it... it sounds logical . . ." And Mountain Girl goes over and
   picks up her baby, a four-month-old girl named Sunshine, out of one of
   those tube-and-net portable cribs from behind the bus and sits down in one
   of the theater seats. But instead of the Indian treatment she unbuttons
   the Can't Bust 'Em coveralls and starts feeding her.

   "... The Nowhere Mine ... Nothing felt and screamed and cried . . ." brang
   tweeeeeeng ". . . and I went back to the Nowhere Mine ..."

   The sledge-hammer juggler rockets away-

   "Who is that?"

   "That's Cassady."

   This strikes me as a marvelous fact. I remember Cassady. Cassady, Neal
   Cassady, was the hero, "Dean Moriarty," of Jack Kerouac's On the Road, the
   Denver Kid, a kid who was always racing back and forth across the U.S. by
   car, chasing, or outrunning, "life," and here is the same guy, now 40, in
   the garage, flipping a sledge hammer, rocketing about to his own Joe Cuba
   and-talking. Cassady never stops talking. But that is a bad way to put it.
   Cassady is a monologuist, only he doesn't seem to care whether anyone is
   listening or not. He just goes off on the monologue, by himself if
   necessary, although anyone is welcome aboard. He will answer all
   questions, although not exactly in that order, because we can't stop here,
   next rest area 40 miles, you understand, spinning off memories, metaphors,
   literary, Oriental, hip allusions, all punctuated by the unlikely
   expression, "you understand-"

                                    Chapter

                                       II

                               The Bladder Totem

   FOR TWO OR THREE DAYS IT WENT LIKE THAT FOR ME IN THE garage with the
   Merry Pranksters waiting for Kesey. The Pranksters took me pretty much for
   granted. One of the Flag People, a blonde who looked like Doris Day but
   was known as Doris Delay, told me I ought to put some more ... well,
   color... into my appearance. That hurt, Doris Delay, but I know you meant
   it as a kindly suggestion. She really did. So I kept my necktie on to show
   that I had pride. But nobody gave a damn about that. I just hung around
   and Cassady flipped his sledge hammer, spectral tapes played, babies
   cried, mihs got flipped out, bus glowed, Flag People walk, freaks loop in
   outta sunlight on old Harriet Street, and I only left to sleep for a few
   hours or go to the bathroom.

   The bathroom; yes. There was no plumbing in the Warehouse, not even any
   cold water. You could go out into a little vacant lot next door, behind a
   board fence, and take a stance amid the great fluffy fumes of human piss
   that were already lufting up from the mud, or you could climb a ladder
   through a trap door that led up to the old hotel where there were dead
   flophouse halls lined with rooms of a kind of spongy scabid old wood that
   broke apart under your glance and started crawling, vermin, molting
   underlife. It was too rank even for the Pranksters. Most of them went up
   to the Shell station on the corner. So I went up to the Shell station on
   the corner, at Sixth and Howard. I asked where the bathroom is and the guy
   gives me The Look-the rotten look of O.K., you're not even buying gas but
   you want to use the bathroom-and finally he points inside the office to
   the tin can. The key to the bathroom is chained to a big empty Shell oil
   can. I pick it up and walk out of the office part, out onto the concrete
   apron, where the Credit Card elite are tanking up and stretching their
   legs and tweezing their undershorts out of the aging waxy folds of their
   scrota, and I am out there carrying a Shell oil can in both hands like a
   bladder totem, around the corner, to the toilet, and-all right, so what.
   But suddenly it hits me that for the Pranksters this is permanent. This is
   the way they live. Men, women, boys, girls, most from middle-class
   upbringings, men and women and boys and girls and children and babies,
   this is the way they have been living for months, for years, some of them,
   across America and back, on the bus, down to the Rat lands of Mexico and
   back, sailing like gypsies along the Servicenter fringes, copping
   urinations, fencing with rotten looks-it even turns out they have films
   and tapes of their duels with service-station managers in the American
   heartland trying to keep their concrete bathrooms and empty
   Dispensa-Towels safe from the Day-Glo crazies...

   Back inside the Warehouse. Everything keeps up. Slowly I am getting more
   and more of a strange feeling about the whole thing. It is not just the
   costumes, the tapes, the bus and all that, however. I have been through
   some crewcut college fraternity weekends that have been weirder-looking
   and -sounding, insane on the beano. The ... feeling begins when the Flag
   People start coming up to me and saying things like-well, when Cassady is
   flipping the sledge hammer, with his head down in the mull of the
   universe, just mulling the hell out of it, and blam, the sledge hammer, he
   misses it, and it slams onto the concrete floor of the garage and one of
   the Flag People says, "You know, the Chief says when Cassady misses it,
   it's never an accident-"

   For a start, the term the "Chief." The Pranksters have two terms for
   referring to Kesey. If it is some mundane matter they're talking about,
   it's just Kesey, as in "Kesey got a tooth knocked out." But if they are
   talking about Kesey as the leader or teacher of the whole group, he
   becomes the Chief. At first this struck me as phony. But then it turned
   to... mysto, as the general mysto steam began rising in my head. This
   steam, I can actually hear it inside my head, a great ssssssssss, like
   what you hear if you take too much quinine. I don't know if this happens
   to anybody else or not. But if there is something startling enough,
   fearful, awesome, strange, or just weird enough, something I sense I can't
   cope with, it is as if I go on Red Alert and the fogging steam starts . .
   .

   "-when Cassady misses, it's never an accident. He's saying something.
   There's something going on in the room, something's getting up tight,
   there's bad vibrations and he wants to break it up.

   They mean it. Everything in everybody's life is... significant. And
   everybody is alert, watching for the meanings. And the vibrations. There
   is no end of vibrations. Sometime after that I was up in Haight-Ashbury
   with some kid, not a Prankster, a kid from another communal group, and the
   kid was trying to open an old secretaire, the kind that opens out into a
   desktop you can write on, and he pinches his finger in a hinge. Only
   instead of saying Aw shit or whatever, the whole thing becomes a parable
   of life, and he says:

   "That's typical. You see that? Even the poor cat who designed this thing
   was playing the game they wanted him to play. You see how this thing is
   designed, to open out? It's always out, into, it's got to be out, into
   your life, the old bullshit thrust-you know?-they don't even think about
   it-you know?-this is just the way they design things and you're here and
   they're there and they're going to keep coming at you. You see that
   kitchen table?" There is an old enamel-top kitchen table you can see
   through a doorway in there. "Now that's actually better design, it
   actually is, than all this ornate shit, I mean, I truly dig that kitchen
   table, because the whole thing is right there-you know?-it's there to
   receive, that's what it's all about, it's passive, I mean what the hell is
   a table anyway? Freud said a table is a symbol of a woman, with her shanks
   open, balling it, in dreams-you know?-and what is this a symbol of? " He
   points to the secretaire. "It's a symbol of fuck-you, Fuck you, right?"
   And so on, until I want to put my hand on his shoulder and say why don't
   you just kick it in the kneecaps and let it go at that.

   But anyway this talk just flows. Everyone is picking up on the most minute
   incidents as if they are metaphors for life itself. Everybody's life
   becomes more fabulous, every minute, than the most fabulous book. It's
   phony, goddamn it. .. but mysto ... and after a while it starts to infect
   you, like an itch, the roseola.

   There is also a lot about games. The straight world outside, it seems, is
   made up of millions of people involved, trapped, in games they aren't even
   aware of. A guy they call Hassler comes in out of the sunlight screen on
   Harriet Street and, zoom, he doesn't even wait for the metaphors. I never
   got into an abstract discussion with a total stranger so fast in my life.
   We began talking right away about the games. Hassler is a young guy,
   good-looking with a wide face and long hair with bangs just exactly like
   Prince Valiant in the comic strip and a turtleneck jersey on with metal
   stars on it, of the sort generals wear on their shoulders, and he says,
   "Games so permeate our culture that..." rumble rumble ego games judge
   everything screwed up brainwashing tell ourselves "... keep on
   oppositioning"-here Hassler stiffens his hands and brings his fingertips
   together like a karate collision-

   But my mind is wandering. I am having a hard time listening because I am
   fascinated by a little plastic case with a toothbrush and toothpaste in it
   that Hassler has tucked under one thumb. It is shuddering around in front
   of my eyes as Hassler's hands opposition ... What a curious bunch of
   bohos. This guy with the generals' stars on his jersey is giving a kind of
   vesper service lecture on the sins of man and-a toothbrush!-but of
   course!-he brushes after every meal!-he really does. He brushes after
   every meal despite the fact that they are living here in this garage, like
   gypsies, and there is no hot water, no toilet, no beds, except for a
   couple of mattresses in which the dirt, the dust, the damps, and the scuds
   are all one, melded, with the stuffing, and they stretch out on the
   scaffoldings, in the bus, in the back of a pickup truck, nostrils
   mildewing-

   "-but you know what? People are beginning to see through the warf of the
   games. Not just the heads and everybody, but all sorts of people. You take
   in California. There's always been this pyramid-"

   Here Hassler outlines a pyramid in the air with his hands and I watch,
   fascinated, as the plastic toothbrush case shiny shiny slides up one
   incline of the pyramid-

   "-they're transcending the bullshit," says Hassler, only his voice is
   earnest and clear and sweet like a high-school valedictorian's, as if he
   just said may next year's seniors remember our motto-"transcending the
   bullshit-"

   -a nice line of light there along the plastic, a straight rigid gleam from
   the past, from wherever Hassler came from. Now I'm doing it again, ah,
   that amiable itch, I just extracted a metaphor, a piece of transcendent
   bullshit, from this freaking toothbrush case-

   "-transcending the bullshit-"

   A TALL GUY COMES INTO THE WAREHOUSE WEARING SOME kind of blue and orange
   outfit like a mime harlequin's and with an orange Day-Glo mask painted on
   his face, so that he looks extraordinarily like The Spirit, if you
   remember that comic strip. This, I am told, is Ken Babbs, who used to be a
   helicopter pilot in Vietnam. I get to talking to him and I ask him what it
   was like in Vietnam and he says to me, very seriously:

   "You really want to know what it was like?"

   "Yeah."

   "Come over here. I'll show you."

   So he leads me back into the garage and he points to a cardboard box lying
   on the floor, just lying there amid all the general debris and madness.

   "It's all in there."

   "It's all in there?"

   "Right, right, right."

   I reach in there and lift out a typewritten manuscript, four or five
   hundred pages. I leaf through. It's a novel, about Vietnam. I look at
   Babbs. He gives me a smile of good fellowship with his Day-Glo mask
   glowing and crinkling up.

   "It's all in there?" I say. "Then I guess it takes a while to get it."

   "Yeah, yeah, right! right! right!" says Babbs, breaking into a laugh, as
   if I just said the funniest thing in the world. "Yeah! Yeah! Hah hah hah
   hah hah hah hah Right! Right!" with the mask glowing and bouncing around
   on his face. I lower the novel back into the box, and for days I would
   notice Babbs's novel about Vietnam lying out there on the floor, out in
   the middle of everything, as if waiting for a twister to whip it up and
   scatter it over San Francisco County, and Babbs would be somewhere around
   saying to some other bemused soul: "Yeah, yeah, right! right! right!"

   The Merry Pranksters were all rapidly assembling, waiting for Kesey.
   George Walker arrives. Walker has on no costume. He is just like some very
   clean-cut blond college kid wearing a T-shirt and corduroy pants, smiling
   and outgoing, just a good West Coast golden boy except for a few random
   notes like the Lotus racing car he has outside, painted with orange
   Day-Glo so that it lights up at dusk, skidding around the corners of the
   California suburbs in four-wheel drifts. And Paul Foster. Foster, I am
   told, is some kind of mad genius, a genius at computers, with all sorts of
   firms with names like Techniflex, Digitron, Solartex, Automaton, trying to
   hunt him down to lay money on him to do this or that for them . . .
   Whether he is a genius or not, I couldn't say. He certainly looks mad
   enough. He is hunched over in a corner, in a theater seat, an emaciated
   figure but with a vast accumulation of clothes. It looks like he has on
   about eight pairs of clown's pants, one on top of the other, each one
   filthier than the next one, all black, sooty, torn, mungey and fungous.
   His head is practically shaven and he is so thin that all the flesh seems
   to be gone off his head and when he contracts his jaw muscles it is as if
   some very clever anatomical diagram has been set in motion with little
   facial muscles, striations, sheathes, ligaments, tissues, nodules,
   integuments that nobody ever suspected before bunching up, popping out,
   springing into definition in a complex chain reaction. And he contracts
   his jaw muscles all the time, concentrating, with his head down and his
   eyes burning, concentrating on a drawing he is doing on a pad of paper, an
   extremely small but crucial drawing by the looks of his concentration . .
   .

   Black Maria sits on a folding chair and smiles ineffably but says nothing.
   One of the Flag People, a thin guy, tells me about Mexicans strung out on
   huaraches. Doris Delay tells me-

   "They're off on their own freak," Hassler continues, "and it may not look
   like much, but they're starting to transcend the bullshit. There's this
   old trinity, Power, Position, Authority, and why should they worship these
   old gods and these old forms of authority-"

   "Fuck God ... ehhhhh ... Fuck God ..."

   This is a voice behind a blanket curtain to one side. Somebody is back
   there rapping off what Hassler just said.

   "Fuck God. Up with the Devil."

   It is a very sleepy, dreamy voice, however. The curtain pulls back and
   standing there is a wiry little guy who looks like a pirate. Behind him,
   back in there behind the curtain, all sorts of wires, instruments, panels,
   speakers are all piled up, a glistening heap of electronic equipment, and
   the tape is back there going ... "In the Nowhere Mine ..." The guy looks
   like a pirate, as I said, with long black hair combed back Tarzan-style,
   and a mustache, and a gold ring through his left earlobe. He stares out,
   sleepily. In fact, he is a Hell's Angel. His name is Freewheeling Frank.
   He has on the Hell's Angels' "colors," meaning a jacket with insignia, a
   jacket with the sleeves cut off and the skull with the helmet on it and
   the wings and a lot of other arcane symbols.

   "Fuck God," says Freewheeling Frank. "Fuck all forms of... of. . ." and
   the words trail off in a kind of dreamy way, although his lips are still
   moving and he kind of puts his head down and trudges off into the gloom,
   toward the bus, with his hands flicking out, first this side, then the
   other, like Cassady, and he is off on his trip, like Cassady, and, all
   right, a Hell's Angel-and the Hassler brushes his teeth after every meal,
   in the middle of a Shell station tin-can economy-

   Just then Kesey arrives.

                                    chapter

                                      III

                               The Electric Suit

   THROUGH THE SHEET OF SUNLIGHT AT THE DOORWAY AND down the incline into the
   crazy gloom comes a panel truck and in the front seat is Kesey. The Chief;
   out on bail. I half expect the whole random carnival to well up into a
   fluorescent yahoo of incalculably insane proportions. In fact, everybody
   is quiet. It is all cool.

   Kesey gets out of the truck with his eyes down. He's wearing a sport
   shirt, an old pair of pants, and some Western boots. He seems to see me
   for an instant, but there is no hello, not a glimmer of recognition. This
   annoys me, but then I see that he doesn't say hello to anybody. Nobody
   says anything. They don't all rush up or anything. It's as if... Kesey is
   back and what is there to say about it.

   Then Mountain Girl booms out: "How was jail, Kesey!"

   Kesey just shrugs. "Where's my shirt?" he says.

   Mountain Girl fishes around in the debris over beside a bunch of theater
   seats and gets the shirt, a brown buckskin shirt with an open neck and red
   leather lacings. Kesey takes off the shirt he has on. He has huge
   latissimi dorsi muscles making his upper back fan out like manta-ray
   wings. Then he puts on the buckskin shirt and turns around.

   Instead of saying anything, however, he cocks his head to one side and
   walks across the garage to the mass of wires, speakers, and microphones
   over there and makes some minute adjustment. "... The Nowhere Mine ..." As
   if now everything is under control and the fine tuning begins.

   From out of the recesses of the garage-I didn't even know they were
   there-here comes a woman and three children. Kesey's wife Faye, their
   daughter Shannon, who is six, and two boys, Zane, five, and Jed, three.
   Faye has long, sorrel-brown hair and is one of the prettiest, most
   beatific-looking women I ever saw. She looks radiant, saintly. Kesey goes
   over to her and picks up each of the kids, and then Mountain Girl brings
   over her baby, Sunshine, and he picks up Sunshine a moment. All right-

   Then Kesey loosens up and smiles, as if he just thought of something. It
   is as if he just heard Mountain Girl's question about how was jail. "The
   only thing I was worried about was this tooth," he says. He pops a dental
   plate out of the roof of his mouth and pushes a false front tooth out of
   his mouth with his tongue. "I had the awfulest feeling," he says. "I was
   going to be in court or talking to reporters or something, and this thing
   was going to fall down like this and I was going to start gumming my
   words." He gums the words "start gumming my words," to illustrate.

   Three weeks later he was to replace it with a tooth with an orange star
   and green stripes on it, an enameled dens incisus lateral bearing a
   Prankster flag. One day at a gas station the manager, a white guy, gets
   interested in the tooth and calls over his helper, a colored guy, and
   says, "Hey, Charlie, come over here and show this fellow your tooth." So
   Charlie grins and bares his upper teeth, revealing a gold tooth with a
   heart cut out in the gold so that a white enamel heart shows through.
   Kesey grins back and then bares his tooth-the colored guy stares a moment
   and doesn't say anything. He doesn't even smile. He just turns away. A
   little while later, down the road, Kesey says very seriously, very
   sorrowfully, "That was wrong of me. I shouldn't have done that." "Done
   what?" "I outniggered him," says Kesey.

   Outniggered him! Kesey has kept these countryisms, like "the awfulest
   feeling," all through college, graduate school, days of literary
   celebration...

   "How did it happen?" says Freewheeling Frank, meaning the tooth.

   "He got in a fight with a Hell's Angel," says Mountain Girl.

   "What!-" Freewheeling Frank is truly startled.

   "Yeah!" says Mountain Girl. "The bastard hit him with a chain!"

   "What!" says Frank. "Where? What was his name!"

   Kesey gives Mountain Girl a look.

   "Naw," she says.

   "What was his name!" Frank says. "What did he look like!"

   "Mountain Girl is shucking you," Kesey says. "I was in a wreck."

   Mountain Girl looks repentant. Angels' duels are no joke with Frank. Kesey
   breaks up ... the vibrations. He sits down in one of the old theater
   seats. He is just talking in a soft, conversational tone, with his head
   down, just like he is having conversation with Mountain Girl or somebody.

   "It's funny," he says. "There are guys in jail who have been in jail so
   much, that's their whole thing. They're jail freaks. They've picked up the
   whole jail language-"

   -everybody starts gathering around, sitting in the old theater seats or on
   the floor. The mysto steam begins rising-

   "-only it isn't their language, it's the guards', the cops', the D.A.'s,
   the judge's. It's all numbers. One of them says, 'What happened to
   so-and-so?' And the other one says, 'Oh, he's over in 34,' which is a
   cellblock. 'They got him on a 211'-they have numbers for different things,
   just like you hear on a police radio-'they got him on a 211, but he can
   cop to a 213 and get three to five, one and a half with good behavior.'

   "The cops like that. It makes them feel better if you play their game.
   They'll chase some guy and run him down and pull guns on him and they're
   ready to blow his head off if he moves a muscle, but then as soon as they
   have him in jail, one of them will come around and ask him how his wife is
   and he's supposed to say she's O.K., thanks, and ask him about his kids,
   like now that we've played the cops-and-robbers part of the game, you can
   go ahead and like me. And a lot of them in there go along with that,
   because that's all they know.

   "When you're running, you're playing their game, too. I was up in
   Haight-Ashbury and I heard something hit the sidewalk behind me and it was
   a kid had fallen out the window. A lot of people rushed up and a woman was
   there crying and trying to pick him up, and I knew what I should do is go
   up and tell her not to move him but I didn't. I was afraid I was going to
   be recognized. And then up the street I saw a cop writing out parking
   tickets and I was going to go up and tell him to call an ambulance. But I
   didn't. I just kept going. And that night I was listening to the news on
   television and they told about a child who fell out of a window and died
   in the hospital."

   And that's what the cops-and-robbers game does to you. Only it is me
   thinking it. Figuring out parables, I look around at the faces and they
   are all watching Kesey and, I have not the slightest doubt, thinking: and
   that's what the cops-and-robbers game does to you. Despite the skepticism
   I brought here, I am suddenly experiencing their feeling. I am sure of it.
   I feel like I am in on something the outside world, the world I came from,
   could not possibly comprehend, and it is a metaphor, the whole scene,
   ancient and vast, vaster than ...

   TWO GUYS COME IN OUT OF THE DAYLIGHT ON HARRIET Street, heads by the looks
   of them, and walk up to Kesey. One of them is young with a sweatshirt on
   and Indian beads with an amulet hanging from the beads-a routine acid-head
   look, in other words. The other one, the older one, is curiously neat,
   however. He has long black hair, but neat, and a slightly twirly mustache,
   like a cavalier, but neat, and a wildly flowered shirt, but neat and
   well-tailored and expensive, and a black leather jacket, only not a
   motorcycle jacket but tailored more like a coat, and a pair of English
   boots that must have set him back $25 or $30. At first he looks like
   something out of Late North Beach, the boho with the thousand-dollar
   wardrobe. But he has a completely sincere look. He has a thin face with
   sharp features and a couple of eyes burning with truth oil. He says his
   name is Gary Goldhill and he wants to interview Kesey for the
   Haight-Ashbury newspaper The Oracle, and when could he do that-but right
   away it is obvious that he has something to get off his chest that can't
   wait.

   "The thing is, Ken"-he has an English accent, but it is a middle-class
   accent, a pleasant sort of Midlands accent-"the thing is, Ken, a lot of
   people are very concerned about what you've said, or what the newspapers
   say you've said, about graduating from acid. A lot of people look up to
   you, Ken, you're one of the heroes of the psychedelic movement"-he has a
   kind of Midlands England way of breaking up long words into syllables,
   psy-che-delic move-ment-"and they want to know what you mean. A very
   beautiful thing is happening in Haight-Ashbury, Ken. A lot of people are
   opening the doors in their minds for the first time, but people like you
   have to help them. There are only two directions we can go, Ken. We can
   isolate ourselves in a monastery or we can organize a religion, along the
   lines of the League for Spiritual Discovery"-the League for Spi-ri-tu-al
   Dis-cov-ery-"and have acid and grass legalized as sacraments, so everyone
   won't have to spend every day in fear waiting for the knock on the door."

   "It can be worse to take it as a sacrament," Kesey says.

   "You've been away for almost a year, Ken," Goldhill says. "You may not
   know what's been happening in Haight-Ashbury. It's growing, Ken, and
   thousands of people have found something very beautiful, and they're very
   open and loving, but the fear and the paranoia, Ken, the waiting for the
   knock on the door-it's causing some terrible things, Ken. It's
   re-spon-si-ble for a lot of bad trips. People are having bad trips, Ken,
   because they take acid and suddenly they feel that any moment there may be
   a knock on the door. We've got to band together. You've got to help us,
   Ken, and not work against us."

   Kesey looks up, away from Goldhill, out across the gloom of the garage.
   Then he speaks in a soft, far-off voice, with his eyes in the distance:

   "If you don't realize that I've been helping you with every fiber in my
   body ... if you don't realize that everything I've done, everything I've
   gone through ..."

   -it is rising and rising-

   "I know, Ken, but the repression-"

   "We're in a period now like St. Paul and the early Christians," Kesey
   says. "St. Paul said, if they shit on you in one city, move on to another
   city, and if they shit on you in that city, move on to another city-"

   "I know, Ken, but you're telling people to stop taking acid, and they're
   not going to stop. They've opened up doors in their minds they never knew
   existed, and a very beautiful thing, and then they read in the papers that
   somebody they've looked up to is suddenly telling them to stop."

   "There's a lot of things I can't tell the newspapers," says Kesey. His
   eyes are still focused long-range, away from Goldhill. "One night in
   Mexico, in Manzanillo, I took some acid and I threw the I Ching. And the I
   Ching-the great thing about the I Ching is, it never sends you Valentines,
   it slaps you in the face when you need it-and it said we had reached the
   end of something, we weren't going anywhere any longer, it was time for a
   new direction-and I went outside and there was an electrical storm, and
   there was lightning everywhere and I pointed to the sky and lightning
   flashed and all of a sudden I had a second skin, of lightning,
   electricity, like a suit of electricity, and I knew it was in us to be
   superheroes and that we could become superheroes or nothing." He lowers
   his eyes. "I couldn't tell this to the newspapers. How could I? I wouldn't
   be put back in jail, I'd be put in Pescadero."

   -rising-rising-

   "But most people aren't ready for that, Ken," Goldhill says. "They're just
   beginning to open the doors in their minds-"

   "But once you've been through that door, you can't just keep going through
   it over and over again-"

   "-and somebody's got to help them through that door-"

   "Don't say stop plunging into the forest," Kesey says. "Don't say stop
   being a pioneer and come back here and help these people through the door.
   If Leary wants to do that, that's good, it's a good thing and somebody
   should do it. But somebody has to be the pioneer and leave the marks for
   others to follow." Kesey looks up again, way out into the gloom. "You've
   got to have some faith in what you're trying to do. It's easy to have
   faith as long as it goes along with what you already know. But you've got
   to have faith in us all the way. Somebody like Gleason-Gleason was with us
   this far." Kesey spread his thumb and forefinger about two inches apart.
   "He was with us as long as our fantasy coincided with his. But as soon as
   we went on further, he didn't understand it, so he was going against us.
   He had ... no faith."

   No faith!-bay fog turns steam, hissing in the old cranium-

   Faith! Further! And it is an exceedingly strange feeling to be sitting
   here in the Day-Glo, on poor abscessed Harriet Street, and realize
   suddenly that in this improbably ex-pie factory Warehouse garage I am in
   the midst of Tsong-Isha-pa and the sangha communion, Mani and the wan
   persecuted at The Gate, Zoroaster, Maidhyoimaongha and the five faithful
   before Vish-tapu, Mohammed and Abu Bekr and the disciples amid the
   pharisaical Koreish of Mecca, Gautama and the brethren in the wilderness
   leaving the blood-and-kin families of their pasts for the one true family
   of the sangha inner circle-in short, true mystic brotherhood-only in poor
   old Formica polyethylene 1960s America without a grain of desert sand or a
   shred of palm leaf or a morsel of manna wilderness breadfruit overhead,
   picking up vibrations from Ampex tapes and a juggled Williams Lok-Hed
   sledge hammer, hooking down mathematical lab drugs, LSD-25, IT-290, DMT,
   instead of soma water, heading out in American flag airport coveralls and
   an International Harvester bus-yet for real!-amid the marshmallow shiny
   black shoe masses-

                                    chapter

                                       IV

                               What Do You Think

                                 of My Buddha?

   THE CURRENT FANTASY ... BY NOW, LATE EVENING, MOST of the Pranksters have
   cleared out of the Warehouse, off to take a shower at the apartment of
   Gut, an ex-Hell's Angel who has a psychedelic shop called Joint Ventures,
   off to here, off to there . .. Just Kesey and a couple of others left in
   the Warehouse. Kesey stands in the gloom of the Control Central, over to
   the side amid the tapes, and cans of movie film marked with adhesive
   strips, and notebooks and microphones and wires and coils, speakers,
   amplifiers. The Prankster Archives-and a tape drones on in a weird voice,
   full of Ouija-whammy:

   "... the blissful counterstroke ... a considerable new message ..."

   A considerable new message ... The current fantasy ... Fantasy is a word
   Kesey has taken to using more and more, for all sorts of plans, ventures,
   world views, ambitions. It is a good word. It is ironic and it isn't. It
   refers to everything from getting hold of a pickup truck-"that's our
   fantasy for this week-

   end"--to some scary stuff out on the raggedy raggedy edge ... like the
   current fantasy, which is somehow to be told at the Acid Test Graduation.
   But how to tell it? Kesey rummages through the film cans and assorted . ..
   Archives ... It has never been possible, has it, truly, just to come out
   and announce the current fantasy, not even in days gone by, when it seemed
   so simple. Now, you take Goldhill, who was just in here with the truth in
   his eyes. He will come closer than most. Kesey could see it. Goldhill was
   open... and into the pudding. He had his own fantasy, the League for
   Spi-ri-tu-al Dis-cov-ery, and yet he is the rare kind who might even be
   willing to move with their fantasy, his and the Pranksters'. It takes a
   rare kind. Because always comes the moment when it's time to take the
   Prankster circus further on toward Edge City. And always at that point
   some good souls are startled: Hey, wait! Like Ralph Gleason with his
   column in the Chronicle and his own clump of hipness. Gleason is one of
   those people ... Kesey can remember them all, people who thought he was
   great so long as his fantasy coincided with theirs. But every time he
   pushed on further-and he always pushed on further-they became confused and
   resentful . . . The tape winds on:

   "... the blissful counterstroke ... through workhorse and intercourse ...
   the blood that was available to him in intercourse ... made us believe he
   was in the apple sauce for twenty years . . ."

   Only lucky dogs and Merry Pranksters can understand this supersonic
   warble! ... most likely .. .

   ". .. the blissful counterstroke . .."

   ... the current fantasy ... Even back on Perry Lane, where everyone was
   young and intellectual and analytical, and the sky, supposedly, was the
   limit-there was no way he could just come right out and say: Come in a
   little closer, friends ... They had their own fantasy for him: he was a
   "diamond in the rough." Wellllll, that was all right, being a diamond in
   the rough. He had gone to Stanford University in 1958 on a
   creative-writing fellowship, and they had taken him in on Perry Lane
   because he was such a swell diamond in the rough. Perry Lane was
   Stanford's bohemian quarter. As bohemias go, Perry Lane was Arcadia,
   Arcadia just off the Stanford golf course. It was a cluster of two-room
   cottages with weathery wood shingles in an oak forest, only not just amid
   trees and greenery, but amid vines, honeysuckle tendrils, all buds and
   shoots and swooping tendrils and twitterings like the best of Arthur
   Rackham and Honey Bear. Not only that, it had true cultural cachet.
   Thorstein Veblen had lived there. So had two Nobel Prize winners everybody
   knew about though the names escaped them. The cottages rented for just $60
   a month. Getting into Perry Lane was like getting into a club. Everybody
   who lived there had known somebody else who lived there, or they would
   never have gotten in, and naturally they got to know each other very
   closely too, and there was always something of an atmosphere of communal
   living. Nobody's door was ever shut on Perry Lane, except when they were
   pissed off.

   It was sweet. Perry Lane was a typical 1950s bohemia. Everybody sat around
   shaking their heads over America's tailfin, housing-development
   civilization, and Christ, in Europe, so what if the plumbing didn't work,
   they had mastered the art of living. Occasionally somebody would suggest
   an orgy or a three-day wine binge, but the model was always that old Zorba
   the Greek romanticism of sandals and simplicity and back to first
   principles. Periodically they would take pilgrimages 40 miles north to
   North Beach to see how it was actually done.

   The main figures on Perry Lane were two novelists, Robin White, who had
   just written the Harper Prize novel, Elephant Hill, and Gwen Davis, a kind
   of West Coast Dawn Powell. In any case, all the established Perry Laners
   could see Kesey coming a mile away.

   He had Jack London Martin Eden Searching Hick, the hick with intellectual
   yearnings, written all over him. He was from Oregon-who the hell was ever
   from Oregon?-and he had an Oregon country drawl and too many muscles and
   callouses on his hands and his brow furrowed when he was thinking hard,
   and it was perfect.

   White took Kesey under his wing and got him and his wife Faye a cottage on
   Perry Lane. The Perry Lane set liked the idea at once. He could always be
   counted on to do perfect things. Like the time they were all having
   dinner-there was a lot of communal dining-and some visitor was going on
   about the ineffable delicacy of James Baldwin's work, and Kesey keeps
   eating but also trying to edge a word in saying, well, bub, I dunno, I
   cain't exactly go along with you there, and the fellow puts down his knife
   and fork very carefully and turns to the others and says,

   "I'll be delighted to listen to whatever Mr. Kesey has to say-as soon as
   he learns to eat from a plate without holding down his meat with his
   thumb."

   Perfect! He had been voted "most likely to succeed" at his high school in
   Springfield, Oregon, and had graduated from the University of Oregon,
   where he was all involved in sports and fraternities, the Ail-American Boy
   bit. He had been a star wrestler in the 174-pound class and a star actor
   in college plays. He had even gone to Los Angeles after he finished
   college, and knocked around Hollywood for a while with the idea of
   becoming a movie star. But the urge to write, to create, had burst up
   through all this thick lumpy All-American crap somehow, like an
   unaccountable purslane blossom, and he had started writing, even
   completing a novel about college athletics, End of Autumn. It had never
   been published, and probably never would be, but he had the longing to do
   this thing. And his background-it was great, too. Somehow the Perry Lane
   set got the idea that his family were Okies, coming out of the Dust Bowl
   during the Depression, and then up to Oregon, wild, sodden Oregon, where
   they had fought the land and shot bears and the rivers were swift and the
   salmon leaped silver in the spring big two-hearted rivers.

   His wife Faye-she was from the same kind of background, only she came from
   Idaho, and they had been high-school sweethearts in Springfield, Oregon,
   and had run off and gotten married when they were both freshmen in
   college. They once made a bet as to which of them had been born in the
   most Low Rent, bottomdog shack, his old place in La Junta, or hers in
   Idaho. He was dead sure there was no beating La Junta for Rundown until
   they got to Idaho, and she sure as hell did win that one. Faye was even
   more soft-spoken than Kesey. She hardly spoke at all. She was pretty and
   extremely sweet, practically a madonna of the hill country. And their
   cottage on Perry Lane-well, everybody else's cottage was run-down in a
   careful bohemian way, simplicity, Japanese paper lamp globes and monk's
   cloth and blond straw rugs and Swedish stainless steel knives and forks
   and cornflowers sticking out of a hand-thrown pot. But theirs was just
   plain Low Rent. There was always something like a broken washing machine
   rusting on the back porch and pigweed, bladderpods, scoke and scurf peas
   growing ragged out back. Somehow it was. . . perfect... to have him and
   Faye on hand to learn as the Perry Lane sophisticates talked about life
   and the arts.

   BEAUTIFUL! . . . THE CURRENT FANTASY . . . BUT HOW TO TELL them?-about
   such arcane little matters as Captain Marvel and The Flash ... and The
   Life-and the very Superkids-

   "... a considerable new message . . . the blissful counter-stroke ..."

   -when they had such a nice clear picture of him as the horny-nailed son of
   the Western sod, fresh from Springfield, Oregon. It was true that his
   father, Fred Kesey, had started him and his younger brother, Joe, known as
   Chuck, shooting and fishing and swimming as early as they could in any way
   manage it, also boxing, running, wrestling, plunging down the rapids of
   the Willamette and the McKenzie Rivers, on inner-tube rafts, with a lot of
   rocks and water and sartin' death foamin' down below. But it was not so
   they could tame animals, forests, rivers, wild upturned convulsed Oregon.
   It was more to condition them to do more of what his father had already
   done a pretty good job

   of-claim whatever he can rightly get by being man enough to take it, and
   not on the frontier, either .. . Kesey Sr. had been part of the 1940s
   migration from the Southwest-not of "Okies" but of Protestant
   entrepreneurs who looked to the West Coast as a land of business
   opportunity. He started out in the Willamette Valley with next to nothing
   and founded a marketing cooperative for dairy farmers, the Eugene Farmers
   Cooperative, and built it into the biggest dairy operation in the area,
   retailing under the name of Darigold. He was one of the big postwar
   success stories in the Valley-and ended up not in an old homestead with
   wood sidings and lightning rods but in a modern home in the suburbs,
   lowslung and pastel, on a street called Debra Lane. The incredible postwar
   American electro-pastel surge into the suburbs!-it was sweeping the
   Valley, with superhighways, dream-boat cars, shopping centers, soaring
   thirty-foot Federal Sign & Signal Company electric supersculptures-Eight
   New Plexiglas Display Features!-a surge of freedom and mobility, of cars
   and the money to pay for them and the time to enjoy them and a home where
   you can laze in a rich pool of pale wall-to-wall or roar through the
   technological wonderworld in motor launches and, in the case of men like
   his father, private planes-

   The things he would somehow suddenly remember about the old home town-over
   here, for example, is the old white clapboard house they used to live in,
   and behind it, back a ways, is the radio tower of station KORE with a red
   light blinking on top-and at night he used to get down on his knees to say
   his prayers and there would be the sky and the light blinking-and he
   always kind of thought he was praying to that red light. And the old
   highway used to take a bend right about here, and it seemed like there was
   always somebody driving through about three or four in the morning, half
   asleep, and they would see the lights over there in town where it was
   getting built up and they'd think the road headed straight for the lights
   and they'd run off the bend and Kesey and his dad would go out to see if
   they could help the guy draggle himself out of the muck-chasing street
   lights!-praying to the red beacon light of KORE!-and a little run-in at
   Gregg's Drive-in, as it used to be called, it is now Speck's, at Franklin
   Boulevard at the bridge over the river. That was the big high-school
   drive-in, with the huge streamlined sculpted pastel display sign with
   streaming streamlined super-slick A-22 italic script, floodlights,
   clamp-on trays, car-hop girls in floppy blue slacks, hamburgers in some
   kind of tissuey wax paper steaming with onions pressed down and fried on
   the grill and mustard and catsup to squirt all over it from out plastic
   squirt cylinders. Saturday nights when everybody is out cruising-some guy
   was in his car in the lot at Gregg's going the wrong way, so nobody could
   move. The more everybody blew the horns, the more determined the guy got.
   Like this was the test. He rolls up the windows and locks the doors so
   they can't get at him and keeps boring in. This guy vs. Kesey. So Kesey
   goes inside and gets a potato they make the french fries with and comes
   out and jams it over the guy's exhaust pipe, which causes the motor to
   conk out and you ain't going any which way now, bub. The guy brings
   charges against Kesey for ruining his engine and Kesey ends up in juvenile
   court before a judge and tries to tell him how it is at Gregg's Drive-In
   on a Saturday night: The Life-that feeling-The Life-the late 1940s early
   1950s American Teenage Drive-in Life was precisely what it was all
   about-but how could you tell anyone about it?

   But of course!-the feeling-out here at night, free, with the motor running
   and the adrenaline flowing, cruising in the neon glories of the new
   American night-it was very Heaven to be the first wave of the most
   extraordinary kids in the history of the world-only 15, 16, 17 years old,
   dressed in the haute couture of pink Oxford shirts, sharp pants, snaky
   half-inch belts, fast shoes-with all this Straight-6 and V-8 power
   underneath and all this neon glamour overhead, which somehow tied in with
   the technological superheroics of the jet, TV, atomic subs,
   ultrasonics-Postwar American suburbs-glorious world! and the hell with the
   intellectual bad-mouthers of America's tailfin civilization... They
   couldn't know what it was like or else they had it cultivated out of
   them-the feeling-to be very Superkids ! the world's first generation of
   the little devils-feeling immune, beyond calamity. One's parents
   remembered the sloughing common order, War & Depression-but Superkids knew
   only the emotional surge of the great payoff, when nothing was common any
   longer-The Life! A glorious place, a glorious age, I tell you! A very Neon
   Renaissance-And the myths that actually touched you at that time-not
   Hercules, Orpheus, Ulysses, and Aeneas-but Superman, Captain Marvel,
   Batman, The Human Torch, The Sub-Mariner, Captain America, Plastic Man,
   The Flash-but of course! On Perry Lane, what did they think it
   was-quaint?-when he talked about the comic-book Super-heroes as the honest
   American myths? It was a fantasy world already, this electro-pastel world
   of Mom&Dad&Buddy&Sis in the suburbs. There they go, in the family car, a
   white Pontiac Bonneville sedan-the family car!-a huge crazy
   god-awful-powerful fantasy creature to begin with, 327 horsepower, shaped
   like twenty-seven nights of lubricious luxury brougham seduction-you're
   already there, in Fantasyland, so why not move off your smug-harbor
   quilty-bed dead center and cut loose-go ahead and say it-Shazam!-juice it
   up to what it's already aching to be: 327,000 horsepower, a whole
   superhighway long and soaring, screaming on toward ... Edge City, and
   ultimate fantasies, current and future ... Billy Batson said Shazam! and
   turned into Captain Marvel. Jay Garrick inhaled an experimental gas in the
   research lab ...

   ... AND BEGAN TRAVELING AND THINKING AT THE SPEED OF light as... The Flash
   .. . the current fantasy. Yes. The Kesey diamond-in-the-rough fantasy did
   not last very long. The most interesting person on Perry Lane as far as he
   was concerned was not any of the novelists or other literary
   intellectuals, but a young graduate student in psychology named Vic
   Lovell. Lovell was like a young Viennese analyst, or at least a California
   graduate-school version of one. He was slender with wild dark hair and
   very cool intellectually and wound-up at the same time. He introduced
   Kesey to Freudian psychology. Kesey had never run into a system of thought
   like this before. Lovell could point out in the most persuasive way how
   mundane character traits and minor hassles around Perry Lane fit into the
   richest, most complex metaphor of life ever devised, namely, Freud's... .
   And a little experimental gas . . . Yes. Lovell told him about some
   experiments the Veterans Hospital in Menlo Park was running with
   "psychomimetic" drugs, drugs that brought on temporary states resembling
   psychoses. They were paying volunteers $75 a day. Kesey volunteered. It
   was all nicely calcimined and clinical. They would put him on a bed in a
   white room and give him a series of capsules without saying what they
   were. One would be nothing, a placebo. One would be Ditran, which always
   brought on a terrible experience. Kesey could always tell that one coming
   on, because the hairs on the blanket he was under would suddenly look like
   a field of hideously diseased thorns and he would put his finger down his
   throat and retch. But one of them-the first thing he knew about it was a
   squirrel dropped an acorn from a tree outside, only it was tremendously
   loud and sounded like it was not outside but right in the room with him
   and not actually a sound, either, but a great suffusing presence, visual,
   almost tactile, a great impacting of... blue... all around him and
   suddenly he was in a realm of consciousness he had never dreamed of before
   and it was not a dream or a delirium but part of his awareness. He looks
   at the ceiling. It begins moving. Panic-and yet there is no panic. The
   ceiling is moving-not in a crazed swirl but along its own planes its own
   planes of light and shadow and surface not nearly so nice and smooth as
   plasterer Super Plaster Man intended with infallible carpenter level
   bubble sliding in dim honey Karo syrup tube not so foolproof as you
   thought, bub, little lumps and ridges up there, bub, and lines, lines like
   spines on crests of waves of white desert movie sand each one with MGM
   shadow longshot of the ominous A-rab coming up over the next crest for
   only the sinister Saracen can see the road and you didn't know how many
   subplots you left up there, Plaster Man, trying to smooth it all out, all
   of it, with your bubble in a honey tube carpenter's level, to make us all
   down here look up and see nothing but ceiling, because we all know
   ceiling, because it has a name, ceiling, therefore it is nothing but a
   ceiling-no room for A-rabs up there in Level Land, eh, Plaster Man.
   Suddenly he is like a ping-pong ball in a flood of sensory stimuli, heart
   beating, blood coursing, breath suspiring, teeth grating, hand moving over
   the percale sheet over those thousands of minute warfy woofings like a
   brush fire, sun glow and the highlight on a stainless-steel rod, quite a
   little movie you have going on in that highlight there, Hondo,
   Technicolors, pick each one out like fishing for neon gumballs with a
   steam shovel in the Funtime Arcade, a ping-pong ball in a flood of sensory
   stimuli, all quite ordinary, but... revealing themselves for the first
   time and happening... Now... as if for the first time he has entered a
   moment in his life and known exactly what is happening to his senses now,
   at this moment, and with each new discovery it is as if he has entered
   into all of it himself, is one with it, the movie white desert of the
   ceiling becomes something rich, personal, his, beautiful beyond
   description, like an orgasm behind the eyeballs, and his A-rabs-A-rabs
   behind the eyelids, eyelid movies, room for them and a lot more in the
   five billion thoughts per second stroboscope synapses-his A-rab heroes,
   fine Daily Double horsehair mustaches wrapped about the Orbicularis Oris
   of their mouths-

   Face! The doctor comes back in and, marvelous, poor tight cone ass, doc,
   Kesey can now see into him. For the first time he notices that the
   doctor's lower left lip is trembling, but he more than sees the tremor, he
   understands it, he can-almost seen!-see each muscle fiber decussate,
   pulling the poor jelly of his lip to the left and the fibers one by one
   leading back into infrared caverns of the body, through transistor-radio
   innards of nerve tangles, each one on Red Alert, the poor ninny's inner
   hooks desperately trying to make the little writhing bastards keep still
   in there, I am Doctor, this is a human specimen before me-the poor ninny
   has his own desert movie going on inside, only each horsehair A-rab is a
   threat-if only his lip, his face, would stay level, level like the honey
   bubble of the Official Plaster Man assured him it would-

   Miraculous! He could truly see into people for the first time-

   And yes, that little capsule sliding blissly down the gullet was LSD.

   VERY SOON IT WAS ALREADY TIME TO PUSH ON BEYOND another fantasy, the
   fantasy of the Menlo Park clinicians. The clinicians' fantasy was that the
   volunteers were laboratory animals that had to be dealt with objectively,
   quantitatively. It was well known that people who volunteered for drug
   experiments tended to be unstable anyway. So the doctors would come in in
   white smocks, with the clipboards, taking blood pressures and heart rates
   and urine specimens and having them try to solve simple problems in logic
   and mathematics, such as adding up columns of figures, and having them
   judge time and distances, although they did have them talk into tape
   recorders, too. But the doctors were so out of it. They never took LSD
   themselves and they had absolutely no comprehension, and it couldn't be
   put into words anyway.

   Sometimes you wanted to paint it huge-Lovell is under LSD in the clinic
   and he starts drawing a huge Buddha on the wall. It somehow encompasses
   the whole-White Smock comes in and doesn't even look at it, he just starts
   asking the old questions on the clipboard, so Lovell suddenly butts in:

   "What do you think of my Buddha?"

   White Smock looks at it a moment and says, "It looks very feminine. Now
   let's see how rapidly you can add up this column of figures here ..."

   Very feminine. Deliver us from the cliches that have locked up even these
   so-called experimenters' brains like the accordion fences in the fur-store
   window-and Kesey was having the same problem with his boys. One of them
   was a young guy with a lie-down crewcut and the straightest face, the
   straightest, blandest, most lineless awfulest Plaster Man honey bubble
   levelest face ever made, and he would come in and open his eyes wide once
   as if to make sure this muscular hulk on the bed were still rational and
   then get this smug tone in his voice which poured out into the room like
   absorbent cotton choked in chalk dust from beaten erasers Springfield High
   School.

   "Now when I say 'Go,' you tell me when you think a minute is up by saying,
   'Now.' Have you got that?"

   Yeah, he had that. Kesey was soaring on LSD and his sense of time was
   wasted, and thousands of thoughts per second were rapping around between
   synapses, fractions of a second, so what the hell is a minute-but then one
   thought stuck in there, held ... ma-li-cious, de-li-cious. He remembered
   that his pulse had been running 75 beats a minute every time they took it,
   so when Dr. Fog says 'Go,' Kesey slyly slides his slithering finger onto
   his pulse and counts up to 75 and says:

   "Now!"

   Dr. Smog looks at his stop watch. "Amazing!" he says, and walks out of the
   room.

   You said it, bub, but like a lot of other people, you don't even know.

   LSD; HOW CAN - NOW THAT THOSE BIG FAT LETTERS ARE babbling out on coated
   stock from every newsstand ... But this was late 1959, early 1960, a full
   two years before Mom&Dad&Buddy&Sis heard of the dread letters and clucked
   because Drs. Timothy Leary and Richard Alpert were french-frying the
   brains of Harvard boys with it. It was even before Dr. Humphry Osmond had
   invented the term "psychodelic," which was later amended to "psychedelic"
   to get rid of the nuthouse connotation of "psycho" ... LSD! It was quite a
   little secret to have stumbled onto, a hulking supersecret, in fact-the
   triumph of the guinea pigs! In a short time he and Lovell had tried the
   whole range of the drugs, LSD, psilocybin, mescaline, peyote, IT-290 the
   superamphetamine, Ditran the bummer, morning-glory seeds. They were onto a
   discovery that the Menlo Park clinicians themselves never-mighty fine
   irony here: the White Smocks were supposedly using them. Instead the White
   Smocks had handed them the very key itself. And you don't even know, bub .
   .. with these drugs your perception is altered enough that you find
   yourself looking out of completely strange eyeholes. All of us have a
   great deal of our minds locked shut. We're shut off from our own world.
   Aand these drugs seem to be the key to open these locked doors. How
   many?-maybe two dozen people in the world were on to this incredible
   secret! One was Aldous Huxley, who had taken mescaline and written about
   it in The Doors of Perception. He compared the brain to a "reducing
   valve." In ordinary perception, the senses send an overwhelming flood of
   information to the brain, which the brain then filters down to a trickle
   it can manage for the purpose of survival in a highly competitive world.
   Man has become so rational, so utilitarian, that the trickle becomes most
   pale and thin. It is efficient, for mere survival, but it screens out the
   most wondrous part of man's potential experience without his even knowing
   it. We're shut off from our own world. Primitive man once experienced the
   rich and sparkling flood of the senses fully. Children experience it for a
   few months-until "normal" training, conditioning, close the doors on this
   other world, usually for good. Somehow, Huxley had said, the drugs opened
   these ancient doors. And through them modern man may at last go, and
   rediscover his divine birthright-

   But these are words, man! And you couldn't put it into words. The White
   Smocks liked to put it into words, like hallucination and dissociative
   phenomena. They could understand the visual skyrockets. Give them a good
   case of an ashtray turning into a Venus flytrap or eyelid movies of
   crystal cathedrals, and they could groove on that, Kluver, op cit., p.
   43n. That was swell. But don't you see?-the visual stuff was just the
   decor with LSD. In fact, you might go through the whole experience without
   any true hallucination. The whole thing was... the experience... this
   certain indescribable  feeling. .. Indescribable, because words can only
   jog the memory, and if there is no memory of... The experience of the
   barrier between the subjective and the objective, the personal and the
   impersonal, the / and the not-I disappearing ... that feeling!... Or can
   you remember when you were a child watching someone put a pencil to a
   sheet of paper for the first time, to draw a picture ... and the line
   begins to grow-into a nose! and it is not just a pattern of graphite line
   on a sheet of paper but the very miracle of creation itself and your own
   dreams flowed into that magical... growing... line, and it was not a
   picture but a miracle... an experience... and now that you're soaring on
   LSD that feeling is coming on again-only now the creation is of the entire
   universe-

   MEANWHILE, OVER ON PERRY LANE, THIS Wasn't PRECISELY the old Searching
   Hick they all knew and loved. Suddenly Kesey-well, he was soft-spoken, all
   right, but he came on with a lot of vital energy. Gradually the whole
   Perry Lane thing was gravitating around Kesey. Volunteer Kesey gave
   himself over to science over at the Menlo Park Vets hospital-and somehow
   drugs were getting up and walking out of there and over to Perry Lane,
   LSD, mescaline, IT-290, mostly. Being hip on Perry Lane now had an element
   nobody had ever dreamed about before, wild-flying, mind-blowing drugs.
   Some of the old Perry Lane luminaries' cool was tested and they were found
   wanting. Robin White and Gwen Davis were against the new drug thing. That
   was all right, because Kesey had had about enough of them, and the power
   was with Kesey. Perry Lane took on a kind of double personality, which is
   to say, Kesey's. Half the time it would be just like some kind of college
   fraternity row, with everybody out on a nice autumn Saturday afternoon on
   the grass in the dapple shadows of the trees and honeysuckle tendrils
   playing touch football or basketball. An hour later, however, Kesey and
   his circle would be hooking down something that in the entire world only
   they and a few avant-garde neuropharmacological researchers even knew
   about, drugs of the future, of the neuropharmacologists' centrifuge
   utopia, the coming age of. . .

   Well shee-ut. An' I don't reckon we give much of a damn any more about the
   art of living in France, either, boys, every frog ought to have a little
   paunch, like Henry Miller said, and go to bed every night in pajamas with
   collars and piping on them-just take a letter for me and mail it down to
   old Morris at Morris Orchids, Laredo, Texas, boys, tell him about enough
   peyote cactus to mulch all the mouldering widows' graves in poor placid
   Palo Alto. Yes. They found out they could send off to a place called
   Morris Orchids in Laredo and get peyote, and one of the new games of Perry
   Lane-goodbye Robin, goodbye Gwen-got to be seeing who was going down to
   the Railway Express at the railroad station and pick up the shipment,
   since possession of peyote, although not of LSD, was already illegal in
   California. There would be these huge goddamned boxes of the stuff, 1,000
   buds and roots $70; buds only-slightly higher. If they caught you, you
   were caught, because there was no excuse possible. There was no other
   earthly reason to have these goddamned fetid plants except to get high as
   a coon. And they would all set about cutting them into strips and putting
   them out to dry, it took days, and then grinding them up into powder and
   packing them in gelatin capsules or boiling it down to a gum and putting
   it in the capsules or just making a horrible goddamned broth that was so
   foul, so unbelievably vile, you had to chill it numb to try to kill the
   taste and fast for a day so you wouldn't have anything on your stomach,
   just to keep eight ounces of it down. But then-soar. Perry Lane, Perry
   Lane.

   Miles

   Miles

   Miles

   Miles

   Miles

   Miles

   Miles

   under all that good vegetation from Morris Orchids and having visions

   of

   Faces

   Faces

   Faces

   Faces

   Faces

   Faces

   Faces

   so many faces rolling up behind the eyelids, faces he has never seen

   before, complete with spectral cheekbones, pregnant eyes, stringy wattles,
   and all of a sudden: Chief Broom. For some reason peyote does this...
   Kesey starts getting eyelid movies of faces, whole galleries of weird
   faces, churning up behind the eyelids, faces from out of nowhere. He knows
   nothing about Indians and has never met an Indian, but suddenly here is a
   full-blown Indian-Chief Broom-the solution, the whole mothering key, to
   the novel...

   HE HADN'T EVEN MEANT TO WRITE THIS BOOK. HE HAD BEEN working on another
   one, called Zoo about North Beach. Lovell had suggested why didn't he get
   a job as night attendant on the psychiatrie ward at Menlo Park. He could
   make some money, and since there wasn't much doing on the ward at night,
   he could work on Zoo. But Kesey got absorbed in the life on the
   psychiatric ward. The whole system-if they set out to invent the perfect
   Anti-cure for what ailed the men on this ward, they couldn't have done it
   better. Keep them cowed and docile. Play on the weakness that drove them
   nuts in the first place. Stupefy the bastards with tranquilizers and if
   they still get out of line haul them up to the "shock shop" and punish
   them. Beautiful-

   Sometimes he would go to work high on acid. He could see into their faces.
   Sometimes he wrote, and sometimes he drew pictures of the patients, and as
   the lines of the ball-point greasy creased into the paper the lines of
   their faces, he could-the interiors of these men came into the lines, the
   ball-point crevasses, it was the most incredible feeling, the anguish and
   the pain came right out front and flowed in the crevasses in their faces,
   and in the ball-point crevasses, the same-one!-crevasses now, black
   starling nostrils, black starling eyes, blind black starling geek cry on
   every face: "Me! Me! Me! Me! I am-Me!"-he could see clear into them.
   And-how could you tell anybody about this? they'll say you're a nut
   yourself-but afterwards, not high on anything, he could still see into
   people.

   The novel, One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest, was about a roustabout named
   Randle McMurphy. He is a big healthy animal, but he decides to fake
   insanity in order to get out of a short jail stretch he is serving on a
   work farm and into what he figures will be the soft life of a state mental
   hospital. He comes onto the ward with his tight reddish-blond curls
   tumbling out from under his cap, cracking jokes and trying to get some
   action going among these deadasses in the loony bin. They can't resist the
   guy. They suddenly want to do things. The tyrant who runs the place, Big
   Nurse, hates him for weakening .. . Control, and the System. By and by,
   many of the men resent him for forcing them to struggle to act like men
   again. Finally, Big Nurse is driven to play her trump card and finish off
   McMurphy by having him lobotomized. But this crucifixion inspires an
   Indian patient, a schizoid called Chief Broom, to rise up and break out of
   the hospital and go sane: namely, run like hell for open country.

   Chief Broom. The very one. From the point of view of craft, Chief Broom
   was his great inspiration. If he had told the story through McMurphy's
   eyes, he would have had to end up with the big bruiser delivering a lot of
   homilies about his down-home theory of mental therapy. Instead, he told
   the story through the Indian. This way he could present a schizophrenic
   state the way the schizophrenic himself, Chief Broom, feels it and at the
   same time report the McMurphy Method more subtly.

   Morris Orchids! He wrote several passages of the book under peyote and
   LSD. He even had someone give him a shock treatment, clandestinely, so he
   could write a passage in which Chief Broom comes back from "the shock
   shop." Eating Laredo buds-he would write like mad under the drugs. After
   he came out of it, he could see that a lot of it was junk. But certain
   passages-like Chief Broom in his schizophrenic fogs-it was true vision, a
   little of what you could see if you opened the doors of perception,
   friends . . .

   RIGHT AFTER HE FINISHED ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST, Kesey sublet his
   cottage on Perry Lane and he and Faye went back up to Oregon. This was in
   June, 1961. He spent the summer working in his brother Chuck's creamery in
   Springfield to accumulate some money. Then he and Faye moved into a little
   house in Florence, Oregon, about 50 miles west of Springfield, near the
   ocean, in logging country. Kesey started gathering material for his second
   novel, Sometimes a Great Notion, which was about a logging family. He took
   to riding early in the morning and at night in the "crummies." These were
   pickup trucks that served as buses taking the loggers to and from the
   camps. At night he would hang around the bars where the loggers went. He
   was Low Rent enough himself to talk to them. After about four months of
   that, they headed back to Perry Lane, where he was going to do the
   writing.

   ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST WAS PUBLISHED IN FEBRUARY, 1962, and it
   made his literary reputation immediately:

   "A smashing achievement"-Mark Schorer

   "A great new American novelist"-Jack Kerouac

   "Powerful poetic realism"-Life

   "An amazing first novel"-Boston Traveler

   "This is a first novel of special worth"-New York Herald Tribune

   "His storytelling is so effective, his style so impetuous, his grasp of
   characters so certain, that the reader is swept along... His is a large,
   robust talent, and he has written a large, robust book"-Saturday Review

   AND ON THE LANE - ALL THIS WAS A CONFIRMATION OF everything they and Kesey
   had been doing. For one thing there was the old Drug Paranoia-the fear
   that this wild uncharted drug thing they were into would gradually... rot
   your brain. Well, here was the answer. Chief Broom!

   And McMurphy ... but of course. The current fantasy ... he was a McMurphy
   figure who was trying to get them to move off their own snug-harbor dead
   center, out of the plump little game of being ersatz daring and ersatz
   alive, the middle-class intellectual's game, and move out to ... Edge City
   ... where it was scary, but people were whole people. And if drugs were
   what unlocked the doors and enabled you to do this thing and realize all
   this that was in you, then so let it be ...

   Not even on Perry Lane did people really seem to catch the thrust of the
   new book he was working on, Sometimes a Great Notion. It was about the
   head of a logging clan, Hank Stamper,

   who defies a labor union and thereby the whole community he lives in by
   continuing his logging operation through a strike. It was an unusual book.
   It was a novel in which the strikers are the villains and the
   strikebreaker is the hero. The style was experimental and sometimes
   difficult. And the main source of "mythic" reference was not Sophocles or
   even Sir James Frazer but... yes, Captain Marvel. The union leaders, the
   strikers, and the townspeople were the tarantulas, all joyfully taking
   their vow: "We shall wreak vengeance and abuse on all whose equals we are
   not... and 'will to equality' shall henceforth be the name for virtue; and
   against all that has power we want to raise our clamor!" Hank Stamper was,
   quite intentionally, Captain Marvel. Once known as.. . Ubermensch. The
   current fantasy ...

   ... on Perry Lane. Nighttime, the night he and Faye and the kids came back
   to Perry Lane from Oregon, and they pull up to the old cottage and there
   is a funny figure in the front yard, smiling and rolling his shoulders
   this way and that and jerking his hands out to this side and the other
   side as if there's a different drummer somewhere, different drummer, you
   understand, corked out of his gourd, in fact... and, well, Hi, Ken, yes,
   uh, well, you weren't around, exactly, you understand, doubledy-clutch,
   doubledy-clutch, and they told me you wouldn't mind, generosity knoweth
   no-ahem-yes, I had a '47 Pontiac myself once, held the road like a
   prehistoric bird, you understand ... and, yes, Neal Cassady had turned up
   in the old cottage, like he had just run out of the pages of On the Road,
   and ... what's next, Chief? Ah .. . many Day-Glo freaking curlicues-

   All sorts of people began gathering around Perry Lane. Quite an...
   underground sensation it was, in Hip California. Kesey, Cassady, Larry
   McMurtry; two young writers, Ed McClanahan and Bob Stone; Chloe Scott the
   dancer, Roy Seburn the artist, Carl Lehmann-Haupt, Vic Lovell... and
   Richard Alpert him-self... all sorts of people were in and out of there
   all the time, because they had heard about it, like the local beats-that
   term was still used-a bunch of kids from a pad called the Chateau, a
   wildhaired kid named Jerry Garcia and the Cadaverous Cowboy, Page
   Browning. Everybody was attracted by the strange high times they had heard
   about... the Lane's fabled Venison Chili, a Kesey dish made of venison
   stew laced with LSD, which you could consume and then go sprawl on the
   mattress in the fork of the great oak in the middle of the Lane at night
   and play pinball with the light show in the sky . .. Perry Lane.

   And many puzzled souls looking in ... At first they were captivated. The
   Lane was too good to be true. It was Walden Pond, only without any Thoreau
   misanthropes around. Instead, a community of intelligent, very open,
   out-front people-out front was a term everybody was using-out-front people
   who cared deeply for one another, and shared... in incredible ways, even,
   and were embarked on some kind of... well, adventure in living. Christ,
   you could see them trying to put their finger on it and ... then .. .
   gradually figuring out there was something here they weren't in on ...
   Like the girl that afternoon in somebody's cottage when Alpert came by.
   This was a year after he started working with Timothy Leary. She had met
   Alpert a couple of years before and he had been 100 percent the serious
   young clinical psychologist-legions of rats and cats in cages with their
   brainstems, corpora callosa and optic chiasmas sliced, spliced, diced,
   iced in the name of the Scientific Method. Now Alpert was sitting on the
   floor in Perry Lane in the old boho Lotus hunker-down and exegeting very
   seriously about a baby crawling blindly about the room. Blindly? What do
   you mean, blindly? That baby is a very sentient creature . .. That baby
   sees the world with a completeness that you and I will never know again.
   His doors of perception have not yet been closed. He still experiences the
   moment he lives in. The inevitable bullshit hasn't constipated his
   cerebral cortex yet. He still sees the world as it really is, while we sit
   here, left with only a dim historical version of it manufactured for us by
   words and official bullshit, and so forth and so on, and Alpert soars in
   Ouspenskyian loop-the-loops for baby while, as far as this girl can make
   out, baby just bobbles, dribbles, lists and rocks across the floor ... But
   she was learning ... that the world is sheerly divided into those who have
   had the experience and those who have not-those who have been through that
   door and-

   It was a strange feeling for all these good souls to suddenly realize that
   right here on woody thatchy little Perry Lane, amid the honeysuckle and
   dragonflies and boughs and leaves and a thousand little places where the
   sun peeped through, while straight plodding souls from out of the Stanford
   eucalyptus tunnel plodded by straight down the fairways on the golf course
   across the way-this amazing experiment in consciousness was going on, out
   on a frontier neither they nor anybody else ever heard of before.

   PALO ALTO, CALIF., JULY 21, I963 - AND THEN ONE DAY THE end of an era, as
   the papers like to put it. A developer bought most of Perry Lane and was
   going to tear down the cottages and put up modern houses and the
   bulldozers were coming.

   The papers turned up to write about the last night on Perry Lane, noble
   old Perry Lane, and had the old cliche at the ready, End of an Era,
   expecting to find some deep-thinking latter-day Thorstein Veblen
   intellectuals on hand with sonorous bitter statements about this machine
   civilization devouring its own past.

   Instead, there were some kind of nuts out here. They were up in a tree
   lying on a mattress, all high as coons, and they kept offering everybody,
   all the reporters and photographers, some kind of venison chili, but there
   was something about the whole setup-

   and when it came time for the sentimental bitter statement, well, instead,
   this big guy Kesey dragged a piano out of his house and they all set about
   axing the hell out of it and burning it up, calling it "the oldest living
   thing on Perry Lane," only they were giggling and yahooing about it, high
   as coons, in some weird way, all of them, hard-grabbing off the stars, and
   it was hard as hell to make the End of an Era story come out right in the
   papers, with nothing but this kind of freaking Olsen & Johnson material to
   work with,

   but they managed to go back with the story they came with, End of an Era,
   the cliche intact, if they could only blot out the cries in their ears of
   Ve-ni-son Chi-li-

   -and none of them would have understood it, anyway, even if someone had
   told them what was happening. Kesey had already bought a new place in La
   Honda, California. He had already proposed to a dozen people on the Lane
   that they come with him, move the whole scene, the whole raggedy-manic
   Era, off to ...

   Versailles, his Low Rent Versailles, over the mountain and through the
   woods, in La Honda, Calif. Where-where-in the lime :::::: light :::::: and
   the neon dust-

   "... a considerable new message ... the blissful counter-stroke ..."

                                    chapter

                                       V

                                The Rusky-Dusky

                                   Neon Dust

   A very Christmas card,

   Kesey's new place near La Honda.

   A log house, a mountain creek, a little wooden bridge

   Fifteen miles from Palo Alto beyond

   Cahill Ridge where Route 84

   Cuts through a redwood forest gorge-

   A redwood forest for a yard!

   A very Christmas card.

   And-

   Strategic privacy.

   Not a neighbor for a mile.

   La Honda lived it Western style.

   One work-a-daddy hive,

   A housing tract,

   But it was back behind the redwoods.

   The work-a-daddy faces could

   Not be seen from scenic old Route 84,

   Just a couple Wilde Weste roadside places, Baw's General Store,

   The Hilltom Motel, in the Wilde Weste Touriste mode.

   With brown wood signs sawed jagged at the ends,

   But sawed neat, you know,

   As if to suggest:

   Wilde Weste Roughing It, motoring friends,

   But Sanitized jake seats

   Ammonia pucks in every urinal

   We aim to keep your Wilde West Sani-pure-

   Who won the West?

   Antisepsis did, I guess.

   La Honda's Wilde Weste lode

   Seems to be owed to the gunslinging Younger Brothers.

   They holed up in town

   And dad-blame but they found a neighborly way

   To pay for their stay.

   They built a whole wooden store, these notorious mothers.

   But them was the Younger Brothers,

   Mere gunslingers.

   Now this Kesey

   And his Merry Humdingers down the road-

   -in the ::::: lime ::::: light :::::

   Early in 1964, just a small group on hand as yet. In the afternoon-Faye,
   the eternal beatific pioneer wife, in the house, at the stove, at the
   sewing machine, at the washing machine, with the children, Shannon and
   Zane, gathered around her skirts. Out in a wooden shack near the creek
   Kesey has his desk and typewriter where he has just finished the revisions
   on Sometimes a Great Notion, now almost 300,000 words long. Kesey's friend
   from Oregon, George Walker, is here, a blond All-American-looking guy in
   his twenties, well-built, son of a wealthy housing developer. Walker has
   what is known as a sunny disposition and is always saying Too much! in the
   most enthusiastic way. And Sandy Lehmann-Haupt. Sandy is the younger
   brother of Carl Lehmann-Haupt, whom Kesey had known on Perry Lane. Sandy
   is a handsome kid, 22 years old, tall, lean-high-strung. Sandy had met
   Kesey three months before, November 14, 1963, through Carl, when Kesey had
   come to New York for the opening of the stage version of One Flew Over the
   Cuckoo's Nest. Kirk Douglas played McMurphy. Sandy had dropped out of
   N.Y.U. and was working as a sound engineer. He was a genius with tapes,
   soundtracks, audio systems and so forth, but he was going through a bad
   time. It got to the point where one day he tried to enter himself in a
   psychiatric ward, only to be talked out of it by Carl, who took him off to
   see the opening of One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest. And there was Randle
   McMurphy ... Kesey ... and Carl asked Kesey to take Sandy out west with
   him, to La Honda, to get him out of the whole New York morass. And if
   there was any place for curing the New York thing, this was it, out back
   of Kesey's in the lime :::::: light :::::: bower :::::: up the path out
   back of the house, up the hill into the redwood forest, Sandy suddenly
   came upon a fabulous bower, like a great domed enclosure, like what people
   mean when they talk about a "cathedral in the pines," only the redwoods
   were even more majestic. The way the sun came down through the redwood
   leaves-trunks and leaves seemed to stretch up for hundreds of feet above
   your head. It was always sunny and cool at the same time, like a perfect
   fall day all year around. The sun came down through miles of leaves and
   got broken up like a pointillist painting, deep green and dapple shadows
   but brilliant light in a soaring deep green super-bower, a perpetual
   lime-green light, green-and-gold afternoon, stillness, perpendicular
   peace, wood-scented, with the cars going by on Route 84 just adding
   pneumatic sound effects, sheee-ooooooooo, like a gentle wind. All peace
   here; very reassuring!

   A FEW TIMES SANDY AND KESEY AND WALKER WOULD WALK UP into the forest with
   axes and cut some wood for the house-but that wasn't really the name of it
   at Kesey's. Sandy could see that Kesey wasn't primarily an outdoorsman. He
   wasn't that crazy about unspoilt Nature. It was more like he had a vision
   of the forest as a fantastic stage setting ... in which every day would be
   a happening, an art form ...

   He had hi-fi speakers up on the roof of the house, and suddenly out here
   in God's great green mountain ozone erupts a manic spade blowing on a
   plastic saxophone, namely, an Ornette Coleman record. It's a slightly
   weird path here that the three loggers take: nutty mobiles hanging from
   the low branches and a lot of wild paintings nailed up on the tree trunks.
   Then a huge tree with a hollow base, and inside it, glinting in the greeny
   dark, here is a tin horse with the tin bent so that the grotesque little
   animal is keeled over, kneeling, in bad shape.

   The terrain Kesey was most interested in, in fact, was inside the house.
   The house was made of logs, but it was more like a lodge than a cabin. The
   main room had big French doors, for a picture-window effect, and exposed
   beams and a big stone fireplace at one end. Kesey had all sorts of
   recording apparatus around, tape recorders, motion-picture cameras and
   projectors, and Sandy helped add still more, some fairly sophisticated
   relay systems and the like. Often the Perry Lane people would drive
   over-although no one had moved to La Honda so far. Ed Mc-Clanahan, Bob
   Stone, Vic Lovell, Chloe Scott, Jane Burton, Roy Seburn. Occasionally
   Kesey's brother Chuck and his cousin Dale would come down from Oregon.
   They both resembled Kesey but were smaller. Chuck was a bright quiet man.
   Casual and down-home. Dale was powerfully built and more completely
   down-home than either. Kesey was trying to develop various forms of
   spontaneous expression. They would do something like ... all lie on the
   floor and start rapping back and forth and Kesey puts a tape-recorder
   microphone up each sleeve and passes his hands through the air and over
   their heads, like a sorcerer making signs, and their voices cut in and out
   as the microphones sail over. Sometimes the results were pretty-

   -well, freaking gibberish to normal human ears, most likely. Or, to the
   receptive standard intellectual who has heard about the 1913 Armory Show
   and Erik Satie and Edgard Varese and John Cage it might sound ... sort of
   avant-garde, you know. But in fact, like everything else here, it grows
   out of... the experience, with LSD. The whole other world that LSD opened
   your mind to existed only in the moment itself-Now-and any attempt to
   plan, compose, orchestrate, write a script, only locked you out of the
   moment, back in the world of conditioning and training where the brain was
   a reducing valve .. .

   So they would try still wilder improvisations ... like the Human Tapes,
   huge rolls of butcher paper stretched out on the floor. They would take
   wax pencils, different colors, and scrawl out symbols for each other to
   improvise on: Sandy the pink drum strokes there, and he would make a sound
   like chee-oonh-chunh, chee-oonh-chunh, and so forth, and Kesey the guitar
   arrows there, broinga broinga brang brang, and Jane Burton the bursts of
   scat vocals there, and Bob Stone the Voice Over stories to the background
   of the Human Jazz-all of it recorded on the tape recorder-and then all
   soaring on-what?-acid, peyote, morning-glory seeds, which were very hell
   to choke down, billions of bilious seeds mulching out into sodden
   dandelions in your belly, bloated-but soaring!-or IT-290, or dexedrine,
   benzedrine, methedrine-Speed!-or speed and grass-sometimes you could take
   a combination of speed and grass and prop that... LSD door open in the
   mind without going through the whole uncontrollable tumult of the LSD ...
   And Sandy takes LSD and the lime :::::: light :::::: and the magical bower
   turns into... neon dust... pointillist particles for sure, now. Golden
   particles, brilliant forest-green particles, each one picking up the
   light, and all shimmering and flowing like an electronic mosaic, pure
   California neon dust. There is no way to describe how beautiful this
   discovery is, to actually see the atmosphere you have lived in for years
   for the first time and to feel that it is inside of you, too, flowing up
   from the heart, the torso, into the brain, an electric fountain ... And
   ... IT-290!-he and George Walker are up in the big tree in front of the
   house, straddling a limb, and he experiences .. . intersubjectivity-he
   knows precisely what Walker is thinking. It isn't necessary to say what
   the design is, just the part each will do.

   "You paint the cobwebs," Sandy says, "and I'll paint the leaves behind
   them."

   "Too much!" says George, because, of course, he knows-all of us sliding in
   and out of these combinations of mutual consciousness, intersubjectivity,
   going out to the backhouse, near the creek, with tape recorders and
   starting to rap-a form of free association conversation, like a jazz
   conversation, or even a monologue, with everyone, or whoever, catching
   hold of words, symbols, ideas, sounds, and winging them back and forth and
   beyond ... the walls of conventional logic ... One of us finds a bunch of
   wooden chessmen. They are carved figures, some kind of ancient men, every
   piece an old carved man, only somebody left them outside and they got wet
   and now they're warped, which sprung them open into their real selves.
   This one's genitals are hanging out despite he has robes on and carries a
   spear-

   -Have you seen my daughter? Claims I embarrass her. Claims the whole world
   knows I have cunt on the brain. At my age-

   -Yes, sir, we have the report. Your daughter's a horny little bitch, but I
   am the King and I have no choice but to cut your balls off-

   -King, I'll throw you for them-

   -Your balls?

   --Right! With those gold hubcaps you lug about there-

   -Right! In fact, incredible. Each one of us has a chess figure in his hand
   and becomes that character and they are rapping off the personalities they
   see in these figures, and they start thinking the same things at once. I,
   too, saw these funny little curves under this figure's hand here, no
   larger than the head of a tiny tack, as... golden hubcaps... I was about
   to say it-

   It is the strangest feeling of my life-intersubjectivity, as if our
   consciousnesses have opened up and flowed together and now one has only to
   look at a flicker of the other's mouth or eye or at the chessman he holds
   in his hand, wobbling-

   -You wouldn't believe a girl with electric eel tits, would you, King?

   -The ones that ionized King Arthur's sword under swamp water?

   -The very ones. Dugs with a thousand tiny suction caps, a horny, duggy
   little girl, I'm afraid, 120 household volts of jail bait if I ever saw
   one-

   -and how, in the wildest operations of chance, could a term like 120
   household volts of jail bait arise in all our minds at once-

   But the swamps, too-it is no longer all Garden of Eden and glorious
   discovery for the old Perry Lane crowd. In fact, there's a little
   grumbling here in the magic dell. Kesey is starting to organize our trips.
   He hands out the drugs personally, one for you, and I one for you ... and
   just when you're starting to lie back and groove on your thing, he comes
   in-Hup!-Hup!-Everybody up! and organizes a tramp through the woods ...

   After it's all over, some of them ask Kesey for some acid and IT-290 to
   take back to Palo Alto. No-o-o-o-o-o, says Kesey, and he cocks his head as
   if he wants to say this thing just right, because it's a delicate
   matter.-I think you should come here and take it...

   Later, on the way back, someone says: We used to be equals. Now it's
   Kesey's trip. We go to his place. We take his acid. We do what he wants.

   But what does he want? Gradually, vaguely, it dawns that Kesey's fantasy
   has moved on again, beyond even theirs, old Perry Lane. In any case,
   nobody has the stomach for Kesey's master plan, that they should all move
   out onto his place, in tents and so forth, transplanting the Perry Lane
   thing to La Honda. They began to eye Kesey's place as a kind of
   hill-country Versailles, with Kesey as the Sun King, looking bigger all
   the time, with that great jaw in profile against the redwoods and the
   mountaintops. It never develops into an open breach, however, or even
   disenchantment. They just get uneasy. They get the feeling that Kesey was
   heading out on further, toward a fantasy they didn't know if they wanted
   to explore.

   OTHER PEOPLE WERE BEGINNING TO SHOW UP AT KESEY'S, AND that was part of
   the trouble. Some of the Perry Lane crowd didn't know exactly what to make
   of Cassady. Here he is before us in Kesey's Versailles, coming on, coming
   on, with his shirt off and his arms jerking and his abdominal obliques
   jutting out at the sides like a weight lifter's . . . We are hip, we value
   the holy primitive. Only Kesey is intimating that one should learn from
   Cassady, he is talking to you. Which he was. Cassady wanted intellectual
   communion. But the intellectuals just wanted him to be the holy primitive,
   the Denver kid, the natural in our midst. Sometimes Cassady would sense
   they weren't accepting him intellectually and go off into the corner,
   still on his manic monologue, muttering, "All right, I'll take my own
   trip, I'll go off on my own trip, this is my own trip, you understand ..."

   Or Page Browning. The Cadaverous Cowboy had found his way over the
   mountain, too. Back on Perry Lane he had been just a Low Rent character
   popping in from time to time on his route. Only now Kesey is intimating
   that one can learn from Page Browning. Kesey finds something loyal, brave
   and creative, creative, under that cadaverous face and the Adam's apple
   and the black motorcycle jacket like a leftover from when he must've
   ridden with the Hell's Angels-and his thick Shellube pit voice. The
   primordial Shellube pits ... could that be it, a little class fear, after
   all, among the hip ... genteel... intellectuals? A little Ahor, as Arthur
   Koestler called it, the Ancient Horror, from boyhood-the genteel suburban
   kid rides his bicycle over to the gas station and there in the grease pit
   area where they lubricate the cars the hard rocks are hunkered down
   telling jokes about pussy, with an occasional clinical reference to bowel
   movements and crepitation. And oh christ don't you remember their forearms
   with the basilic veins wrapped around them like surgical tubes, gorged
   with the unattainable lower-class hard-rock power that any moment is going
   to look up and spot us... genteel little pudding kids. But Kesey loved
   this Low Rent stuff. He was ready to swing with it. In time he would even
   be swinging with the beasts from the veritable Ahor fathoms of the
   Shellube pits, the Hell's Angels themselves . . .

   In fact, only a few of the new retinue that showed up at La Honda were Low
   Rent in terms of background, but the place became much more down-home than
   Perry Lane.

   One of Kesey's old friends, Kenneth Babbs, showed up, just back from
   Vietnam, where he had been a captain in the Marines, flying helicopters.
   Babbs had graduated magna cum laude from Miami University, majoring in
   English. He had also been a great athlete. He entered the creative-writing
   program at Stanford, where Kesey met him. Babbs was tall, powerful, a very
   Rabelaisian creature. Back from the wars, he came on like a great hearty
   grizzly bear roaring a cosmic laugh. Sometimes he would wear a flight suit
   for days at a time, no matter where he was, come fly with me. And Babbs
   was capable of some wild flights. He gave the Kesey colony much of its new
   style ... Yes. He introduced the idea of the pranks, great public put-ons
   they could perform ...

   And Mike Hagen arrived. Hagen was a fellow Kesey had known in Oregon,
   good-looking, soft-spoken, well-mannered, from a good family, fairly rich,
   the kind of kid daddies smile over as he takes their teenage daughter out
   on her first date, Yup, I've raised her pretty damn well, if I do say so.
   No riffraff for my girl, just nice Christian boys who say Yes, sir, Yes,
   ma'am and comb their hair down with water on the comb. About ten minutes
   after Hagen pulled into Kesey's, he had his Screw Shack built out back of
   the cabin, a lean-to banged together with old boards and decorated inside
   with carpet remnants, a mattress with an India-print coverlet, candles,
   sparkling little bijoux, a hi-fi speaker-for the delight and comfort of
   Hagen's Girls. Oh christ Hagen's Girls and the trouble they caused-Stark
   Naked, Anonymous-but they come later. Hagen was a benign but inspired con
   man in a sweet way. He had a special gift for haggling, bartering,
   hassling, and Hagen would turn up with his car crammed with gleaming
   tape-recorder equipment, movie equipment, microphones, speakers,
   amplifiers, even video-tape equipment, and the audio-visual level started
   rising around here-

   Then one day, for example, one of Kesey's old Perry Lane friends, Gurney
   Norman, a writer, drove up for the weekend from Fort Ord, the Army camp,
   and brought along one of his Army friends, a 24-year-old first lieutenant
   in the infantry named Ron Bevirt. Bevirt put everybody off at first,
   because he looked totally Army. He was fat and sloppy-looking and had a
   particularly gross-looking Army crewcut and was totally unsophisticated.
   Bevirt, however, liked them and he kept coming on weekends and bringing a
   lot of food, which he enjoyed sharing with everybody, and he smiled and
   laughed a lot and people couldn't help but get to like him. By and by he
   was out of the Army and he came around all the time. He even started
   getting leaner and harder and his hair grew out until it was like Prince
   Valiant's, in the comic strip, and he was a pretty handsome guy and very
   much into the ... pudding. By and by he became known as The Hassler and
   his real name vanished almost...

   AND BY AND BY, OF COURSE, THE CITIZENS OF LA HONDA AND others would start
   wondering ... what are the ninnies doing? How to tell it? But there was no
   way to tell them about the experience. You couldn't put it into words. The
   citizens always had the same fantasy, known as the pathology fantasy.
   These ninnies are pathological. Sometimes it was psychological-what do
   these kids come from, broken homes or what? Sometimes it was social-are
   these kids alienated? is our society getting rotten at the core? or what?
   The citizens couldn't know about the LSD experience, because that door had
   never opened for them. To be on the threshold of-Christ! how to tell them
   about the life here? The Youth had always had only three options: go to
   school, get a job or live at home. And-how boring each was!-compared to
   the experience of. . . the infinite . . . and a life in which the subject
   is not scholastic or bureaucratic but... Me and Us, the attuned ones amid
   the non-musical shiny-black-shoe multitudes, /-with my eyes on that almost
   invisible hole up there in the r-r-r-redwood sky ...

   ONE NIGHT BOB STONE WAS SITTING AT HOME IN MENLO Park-he was still in the
   creative-writing program at Stanford-and the phone rang and it was Babbs
   calling from Kesey's in La Honda. Come on over, he said, we're going to
   get something going. Well, no, Stone said, he didn't feel much up to it,
   he was kind of tired and it would take an hour to drive over the mountain
   and an hour to drive back, and maybe some other time-

   "Come on, Bob," says Babbs. "It won't take you an hour. You can get here
   in thirty minutes."

   Babbs is in very high spirits and in the background Stone can hear music
   and voices and they are, indeed, getting something going.

   "I know how long it takes," says Stone. "And it takes forty-five minutes
   or an hour, more like an hour at night."

   'Listen!" says Babbs, who is laughing and practically shouting into the
   phone. "The intrepid traveler can make it in thirty minutes! The intrepid
   traveler can make it with the speed of light!"

   In the background Babbs can hear a couple of voices rapping DEGff that:
   "The intrepid traveler! The intrepid traveler!"

   "The intrepid traveler," Babbs is shouting. "The intrepid traveler just
   gets up and walks out and he's here!"

   And so on, until Stone's resistance wears down and he gets in his car and
   heads over. He arrives; after an hour, yes.

   As soon as he gets out of his car out front of the house he starts hearing
   the Big Rap, from inside the house, from up in the woods, it's like drums
   are beating and horns are blowing and Pranksters are ululating and
   rapping: "The Intrepid Traveler!"

   "The Intrepid Traveler!"

   "The Intrepid Traveler!"

   "The Intrepid Traveler!"

   "The Intrepid Traveler!"

   He goes through the French doors in the front, mad ochre and lurid lights,
   gongs, pipes, drums, guitars being banged like percussion bangers-

   "The Intrepid Traveler!"

   "The Intrepid Traveler-the traveler in a flash!"

   "The Intrepid Traveler-"

   "-straights out the curves!"

   "The Intrepid Traveler-"

   "-curves out the straights!"

   "The Intrepid Traveler-"

   "-a beam of light!"

   "The Intrepid Traveler-"

   "-a lightning beam ! "

   "The Intrepid Traveler-"

   "-shortens the circuit!"

   "The Intrepid Traveler-"

   "-short-waves the band!"

   "The Intrepid Traveler-"

   "-and his band of Merry Pranksters!"

   "The Intrepid Traveler!-"

   -and his band of Merry Pranksters take a journey to the East.

                                    chapter

                                       VI

                                    The Bus

   I couldn't tell you for sure which of the merry Pranksters got the idea
   for the bus, but it had the Babbs touch. It was a superprank, in any case.
   The original fantasy, here in the spring of 1964, had been that Kesey and
   four or five others would get a station wagon and drive to New York for
   the New York World's Fair. On the way they could shoot some film, make
   some tape, freak out on the Fair and see what happened. They would also be
   on hand, in New York, for the publication of Kesey's second novel,
   Sometimes a Great Notion, early in July. So went the original fantasy.

   Then somebody-Babbs?-saw a classified ad for a 1939 International
   Harvester school bus. The bus belonged to a man in Menlo Park. He had a
   big house and a lot of grounds and a nice set of tweeds and flannels and
   eleven children. He had rigged out the bus for the children. It had bunks
   and benches and a refrigerator and a sink for washing dishes and cabinets
   and shelves and a lot of other nice features for living on the road. Kesey
   bought it for $1,500-in the name of Intrepid Trips, Inc.

   Kesey gave the word and the Pranksters set upon it one afternoon. They
   started painting it and wiring it for sound and cutting a hole in the roof
   and fixing up the top of the bus so you could sit up there in the open air
   and play music, even a set of drums and electric guitars and electric bass
   and so forth, or just ride. Sandy went to work on the wiring and rigged up
   a system with which they could broadcast from inside the bus, with tapes
   or over microphones, and it would blast outside over powerful speakers on
   top of the bus. There were also microphones outside that would pick up
   sounds along the road and broadcast them inside the bus. There was also a
   sound system inside the bus so you could broadcast to one another over the
   roar of the engine and the road. You could also broadcast over a tape
   mechanism so that you said something, then heard your own voice a second
   later in variable lag and could rap off of that if you wanted to. Or you
   could put on earphones and rap simultaneously off sounds from outside,
   coming in one ear, and sounds from inside, your own sounds, coming in the
   other ear. There was going to be no goddamn sound on that whole trip,
   outside the bus, inside the bus, or inside your own freaking larynx, that
   you couldn't tune in on and rap off of.

   The painting job, meanwhile, with everybody pitching in in a frenzy of
   primary colors, yellows, oranges, blues, reds, was sloppy as hell, except
   for the parts Roy Seburn did, which were nice manic mandalas. Well, it was
   sloppy, but one thing you had to say for it; it was freaking lurid. The
   manifest, the destination sign in the front, read: "Furthur," with two
   u's.

   THEY TOOK A TEST RUN UP INTO NORTHERN CALIFORNIA AND right away this
   wild-looking thing with the wild-looking people was great for stirring up
   consternation and vague befuddling resentment among the citizens. The
   Pranksters were now out among them, and it was exhilarating-look at the
   mothers staring!-and there was going to be holy terror in the land. But
   there would also be people who would look up out of their poor
   work-a-daddy lives in some town, some old guy, somebody's stenographer,
   and see this bus and register ... delight, or just pure open-invitation
   wonder. Either way, the Intrepid Travelers figured, there was hope for
   these people. They weren't totally turned off. The bus also had great
   possibilities for altering the usual order of things. For example, there
   were the cops.

   One afternoon the Pranksters were on a test run in the bus going through
   the woods up north and a forest fire had started. There was smoke
   beginning to pour out of the woods and everything. Everybody on the bus
   had taken acid and they were zonked. The acid was in some orange juice in
   the refrigerator and you drank a paper cup full of it and you were zonked.
   Cassady was driving and barreling through the burning woods wrenching the
   steering wheel this way and that way to his inner-wired beat, with a siren
   wailing and sailing through the rhythm.

   A siren? It's a highway patrolman, which immediately seems like the
   funniest thing in the history of the world. Smoke is pouring out of the
   woods and they are all sailing through leaf explosions in the sky, but the
   cop is bugged about this freaking bus. The cop yanks the bus over to the
   side and he starts going through a kind of traffic-safety inspection of
   the big gross bus, while more and more of the smoke is billowing out of
   the woods. Man, the license plate is on wrong and there's no light over
   the license plate and this turn signal looks bad and how about the brakes,
   let's see that hand brake there. Cassady, the driver, is already into a
   long monologue for the guy, only he is throwing in all kinds of sirs:
   "Well, yes sir, this is a Hammond bi-valve serrated brake, you understand,
   sir, had it put on in a truck ro-de-o in Springfield, Oregon, had to back
   through a slalom course of baby's bottles and yellow nappies, in the
   existential culmination of Oregon, lots of outhouse freaks up there, you
   understand, sir, a punctual sort of a state, sir, yes sir, holds to 28,000
   pounds, 28,000 pounds, you just look right here, sir, tested by a
   pureblooded Shell Station attendant in Springfield, Oregon, winter of '62,
   his gumball boots never froze, you understand, sir, 28,000 pounds hold,
   right here-" Whereupon he yanks back on the hand-brake as if it's attached
   to something, which it isn't, it is just dangling there, and jams his foot
   on the regular brake, and the bus shudders as if the hand brake has a hell
   of a bite, but the cop is thoroughly befuddled now, anyway, because
   Cassady's monologue has confused him, for one thing, and what the hell are
   these... people doing. By this time everybody is off the bus rolling in
   the brown grass by the shoulder, laughing, giggling, ya-hooing, zonked to
   the skies on acid, because, mon, the woods are burning, the whole world is
   on fire, and a Cassady monologue on automotive safety is rising up from
   out of his throat like weenie smoke, as if the great god Speed were frying
   in his innards, and the cop, representative of the people of California in
   this total freaking situation, is all hung up on a hand brake that doesn't
   exist in the first place. And the cop, all he can see is a bunch of
   crazies in screaming orange and green costumes, masks, boys and girls, men
   and women, twelve or fourteen of them, lying in the grass and making
   hideously crazy sounds-christ almighty, why the hell does he have to
   contend with ... So he wheels around and says, "What are you, uh-show
   people?"

   "That's right, officer," Kesey says. "We're show people. It's been a long
   row to hoe, I can tell you, and it's gonna be a long row to hoe, but
   that's the business."

   "Well," says the cop, "you fix up those things and ..." He starts backing
   off toward his car, cutting one last look at the crazies. "... And watch
   it next time ..." And he guns on off.

   That was it! How can you give a traffic ticket to a bunch of people
   rolling in the brown grass wearing Day-Glo masks, practically Greek
   masques, only with Rat phosphorescent elan, giggling, keening in their
   costumes and private world while the god Speed sizzles like a short-order
   French fry in the gut of some guy who doesn't even stop talking to
   breathe. A traffic ticket? The Pranksters felt more immune than ever.
   There was no more reason for them to remain in isolation while the ovoid
   eyes of La Honda supurated. They could go through the face of America
   muddling people's minds, but it's a momentary high, and the bus would be
   gone, and all the Fab foam in their heads would settle back down into
   their brain pans.

   SO THE HIERONYMUS BOSCH BUS HEADED OUT OF KESEY'S place with the
   destination sign in front reading "Furthur" and a sign in the back saying
   "Caution: Weird Load." It was weird, all right, but it was euphoria on
   board, barreling through all that warm California sun in July, on the
   road, and everything they had been working on at Kesey's was on board and
   heading on Furthur. Besides, the joints were going around, and it was nice
   and high out here on the road in America. As they headed out, Cassady was
   at the wheel, and there was Kesey, Babbs, Page Browning, George Walker,
   Sandy, Jane Burton, Mike Hagen, Hassler, Kesey's brother Chuck and his
   cousin Dale, a guy known as Brother John, and three newcomers who were
   just along for the ride or just wanted to go to New York.

   One of them was a young, quite handsome kid-looked sort of like the early,
   thin Michael Caine in Zulu-named Steve Lambrecht. He was the
   brother-in-law of Kesey's lawyer, Paul Robertson, and he was just riding
   to New York to see a girl he knew named Kathy. Another was a girl named
   Paula Sundsten. She was young, plump, ebullient, and very sexy. Kesey knew
   her from Oregon. Another one was some girl Hagen of the Screw Shack had
   picked up in San Francisco, on North Beach. She was the opposite of Paula
   Sundsten. She was thin, had long dark hair, and would be moody and silent
   one minute and nervous and carrying on the next. She was good-looking like
   a TV witch.

   By the time they hit San Jose, barely 30 miles down the road, a lot of the
   atmosphere of the trip was already established. It was nighttime and many
   souls were high and the bus had broken down. They pulled into a service
   station and pretty soon one of the help has his nose down in under the
   hood looking at the engine while Cassady races the motor and the
   fluorescent stanchion lights around the station hit the bus in weird
   phosphorescent splashes, the car lights stream by on the highway, Cassady
   guns the engine some more, and from out of the bus comes a lot of weird
   wailing, over the speakers or just out the windows. Paula Sundsten has
   gotten hold of a microphone with the variable-lag setup and has found out
   she can make weird radio-spook laughing ghoul sounds with it, wailing like
   a banshee and screaming "How was your stay-ay-ay-ay ... in San
   Ho-zay-ay-ay-ay-ay," with the variable lag picking up the ay-ay-ay-ays and
   doubling them, quadrupling them, octupling them. An endless ricocheting
   echo-and all the while this weird, slightly hysterical laugh and a
   desperate little plunking mandolin sail through it all, coming from
   Hagen's girl friend, who is lying back on a bench inside, plunking a
   mandolin and laughing-in what way . ..

   Outside, some character, some local, has come over to the bus, but the
   trouble is, he is not at all impressed with the bus, he just has to do the
   American Man thing of when somebody's car is broken down you got to come
   over and make your diagnosis.

   And he is saying to Kesey and Cassady, "You know what I'd say you need?
   I'd say you need a good mechanic. Now, I'm not a good mechanic, but I-"
   And naturally he proceeds to give his diagnosis, while Paula wails, making
   spook-house effects, and the Beauty Witch keens and goons-and-

   "-like I say, what you need is a good mechanic, and I'm not a good
   mechanic, but-"

   And-of course!-the Non-people. The whole freaking world was full of people
   who were bound to tell you they weren't qualified to do this or that but
   they were determined to go ahead and do just that thing anyway. Kesey
   decided he was the Non-navigator. Babbs was the Non-doctor. The bus trip
   was already becoming an allegory of life.

                                     * * *

   BEFORE HEADING EAST, OUT ACROSS THE COUNTRY, THEY stopped at Babbs's place
   in San Juan Capistrano, down below Los Angeles. Babbs and his wife Anita
   had a place down there. They pulled the bus into Babbs's garage and sat
   around for one final big briefing before taking off to the east.

   Kesey starts talking in the old soft Oregon drawl and everybody is quiet.

   "Here's what I hope will happen on this trip," he says. "What I hope will
   continue to happen, because it's already starting to happen. All of us are
   beginning to do our thing, and we're going to keep doing it, right out
   front, and none of us are going to deny what other people are doing."

   "Bullshit," says Jane Burton.

   This brings Kesey up short for a moment, but he just rolls with it.

   "That's Jane," he says. "And she's doing her thing. Bullshit. That's her
   thing and she's doing it."

   "None of us are going to deny what other people are doing. If saying
   bullshit is somebody's thing, then he says bullshit. If somebody is an
   ass-kicker, then that's what he's going to do on this trip, kick asses.
   He's going to do it right out front and nobody is going to have anything
   to get pissed off about. He can just say, 'I'm sorry I kicked you in the
   ass, but I'm not sorry I'm an ass-kicker. That's what I do, I kick people
   in the ass.' Everybody is going to be what they are, and whatever they
   are, there's not going to be anything to apologize about. What we are,
   we're going to wail with on this whole trip."

   HAUL ASS, AND WHAT WE ARE, OUT ACROSS THE SOUTHWEST, and all of it on film
   and on tape. Refrigerator, stove, a sink, bunk racks, blankets, acid,
   speed, grass-with Hagen handling the movie camera and everybody on
   microphones and the music blaring out over the roar of the bus, rock 'n'
   roll, Jimmy Smith. Cassady is revved up like they've never seen him
   before, with his shirt off, a straw version of a cowboy hat on his head,
   bouncing up and down on the driver's seat, shifting gears-doubledy-clutch,
   doubledy-clutch, blamming on the steering wheel and the gearshift box,
   rapping over the microphone rigged up by his seat like a manic tour guide,
   describing every car going by,

   "-there's a barber going down the highway cutting his hair at 500 miles an
   hour, you understand-"

   "So remember those expressions, sacrifice, glorious and in vain!" Babbs
   says.

   "Food! Food! Food!" Hagen says.

   "Get out the de-glom ointment, sergeant!" says Babbs, rapping at Steve
   Lambrecht. "The only cure for joint glom, gets the joint off the lip in
   instant De-Glom-"

   -and so on, because Steve always has a joint glommed onto his lip and, in
   fact, gets higher than any man alive, on any and all things one throws his
   way, and picks up the name Zonker on this trip-

   "-De-Glom for the Zonker!-"

   -and then Babbs parodies Cassady-

   "-and there's a Cadillac with Marie Antoinette-"

   -and the speakers wail, and the mandolin wails and the ! weird laugh
   wails, and the variable lag wails-ails-ails-ails-ails-ails, and
   somebody-who?-hell, everybody wails,

   "-we're finally beginning to move, after three fucking days!"

   ON THE SECOND DAY THEY REACHED WIKIEUP, AN OLD WILD West oasis out in the
   Arizona desert along Route 60. It was all gray-brown desert and sun and
   this lake, which was like a huge slimy kelp pond, but the air was
   fantastic. Sandy felt great. Then Kesey held the second briefing. They
   were going to take their first acid of the trip here and have their first
   major movie production. He and Babbs and the gorgeous sexy Paula Sundsten
   were going to take acid-Wikieup!-and the others were going to record what
   happened. Hagen and Walker were going to film it, Sandy was going to
   handle the sound, and Ron Bevirt was going to take photographs.

   Sandy feels his first twinge of-what? Like ... there is going to be
   Authorized Acid only. And like ... they are going to be separated into
   performers and workers, stars and backstage. Like . .. there is an inner
   circle and an outer circle. This was illogical, because Hagen and Walker,
   certainly, were closer to Kesey than any other Pranksters besides Babbs,
   and they were "workers," too, but that was the way he feels. But he
   doesn't say anything. Not... out front.

   Kesey and Babbs and Paula hook down some acid orange juice from the
   refrigerator and wait for the vibrations. Paula is in a hell of a great
   mood. She has never taken LSD before, but she looks fearless and immune
   and ready for all, and she hooks down a good slug of it. They wait for the
   vibrations ... and here they come.

   Babbs has a big cane, a walking stick, and he is waving it around in the
   air, and the three of them, Babbs, Kesey and Paula, go running and kicking
   and screaming toward the lake and she dives in-and comes up with her head
   covered in muck and great kelpy strands of green pond slime-and beaming in
   a way that practically radiates out over the face of the lake and the
   desert. She has surfaced euphoric-

   "Oooooh! It sparkles!"

   -pulling her long strands of slime-slithering hair outward with her hands
   and grokking and freaking over it-

   "Ooooooooh! It sparkles!"

   -the beads of water on her slime strands are like diamonds to her, and
   everybody feels her feeling at once, even Sandy-

   "Oooooooooh! It sparkles!"

   -surfaced euphoric! euphorically garlanded in long greasy garlands of pond
   slime, the happiest slime freak in the West-

   -and Babbs is euphoric for her-

   Gretchen Fetchin the Slime Queen!" he yells and waves his cane at the sky.

   "Ooooooooh! It sparkles!"

   "Gretchen Fetchin the Slime Queen!"

   "It sparkles!"

   "Gretchen Fetchin!"

   And it is beautiful. Everybody goes manic and euphoric like a vast contact
   high, like they have all suddenly taken acid themselves. Kesey is in an
   athletic romp, tackling the ferns and other slimy greenery in the lake.
   Babbs and Paula-Gretchen Fetchin!-are yahooing at the sky. Hagen is
   feverishly filming it all, Sandy has a set of huge cables stretched out to
   the very edge of the lake, picking up the sound, Ron Bevirt is banging
   away with his camera. Babbs and Paula-Gretchen Fetchin!-and Kesey keep
   plunging out into the mucky innards of the lake.

   "Come back!" Hagen the cameraman starts yelling. "You're out of range ! "

   But Babbs and Paula and Kesey can't hear him. They are cartwheeling
   further and further out into the paradise muck-

   "It sparkles!"

   "Gretchen Fetchin-Queen of the Slime!"

   But meanwhile Hagen's Beauty Witch, in the contagion of the moment, has
   slipped to the refrigerator and taken some acid, and now she is outside of
   the bus on the desert sand wearing a black snakeskin blouse and a black
   mantle, with her long black hair coming down over it like in a
   pre-Raphaelite painting and a cosmic grin on her witch-white face, lying
   down on the desert, striking poses and declaiming in couplets. She's
   zonked out of her nut, but it's all in wild manic Elizabethan couplets:

   "Methinks you need a gulp of grass

   And so it quickly came to pass

   You fell to earth with eely shrieking,

   Wooing my heart, freely freaking!"

   -and so forth. Well, she wins Hagen's manic heart right away, and soon he
   has wandered off from the Lake of the Slime Euphoria and is in a
   wide-legged stance over her with the camera as she lies declaiming on the
   desert floor, camera zeroed in on her like she is Maria Montez in a love
   scene-and now the Beauty Witch is off on her trip for good . . .

   BACK ON THE BUS AND OFF FOR PHOENIX IN THE SLIME-Euphoric certitude that
   they and the movie-The Movie!- many allegories of life-that they could not
   miss now. Hagen pressed on with the film, hour after hour in the bouncing
   innards of the bus. There were moments in the History of Film that broke
   everybody up. One was when they reached Phoenix. This was during the 1964
   election excitement and they were in Barry Goldwater's home town, so they
   put a streamer on the bus reading: "A Vote for Barry is a Vote for Fun."
   And they put American flags up on the bus and Cassady drove the bus
   backward down the main drag of Phoenix while Hagen recorded it on film and
   the flags flew backward in the wind-stream. The citizens were suitably
   startled, outraged, delighted, nonplused, and would wheel around and start
   or else try to keep their cool by sidling glances like they weren't going
   to be impressed by any weird shit-and a few smiled in a frank way as if to
   say, I am with you-if only I could be with you!

   The fact that they were all high on speed or grass, or so many
   combinations thereof that they couldn't keep track, made it seem like a
   great secret life. It was a great secret life. The befuddled citizens
   could only see the outward manifestations of the incredible stuff going on
   inside their skulls. They were all now characters in their own movies or
   the Big Movie. They took on new names and used them.

   Steve Lambrecht was Zonker. Cassady was Speed Limit. Kesey was
   Swashbuckler. Babbs was Intrepid Traveler. Hagen, bouncing along with the
   big camera, soaring even while the bus roared, was Mai Function. Ron
   Bevirt had charge of all the equipment, the tools, wires, jacks, and
   stuff, and became known as Equipment Hassler, and then just Hassler.
   George Walker was Hardly Visible. And Paula Sundsten became ... Gretchen
   Fetchin the Slime Queen, of course ...

   A notebook!-for each of the new characters in The Movie, a plain child's
   notebook, and each character in this here movie can write in his notebook
   himself or other people can pick up the notebook and write in it-who knows
   who wrote what?-and in Gretchen Fetchin it says:

   Bury them in slime!

   She cried, flailing about the garden-

   With a sprig of parsley clutched in

   her hands-which had always been

   clamped in her hands.

   This is strange business,

   Gets weirder all the time,

   She said, wrapping some around

   her finger, for we are always

   moist in her hand ... "Naturally," she

   said, "The roots are deep."

   That was no surprise, but she

   was mildly curious to

   know what the hell is

   THAT

   Whereupon he got very

   clumsy, giggled confidentially,

   and tripped over her shadow,

   carrying them both into

   an unaccountable adventure.

   Barely a week out and already beautiful ebullient sexy Gretchen Fetchin
   the Slime Queen, Gretch, is synched in. Kesey, the very Swashbuckler
   himself, makes a play for her, and that should be that, but she looks
   at-Babbs-who tripped over her

   shadow?-Hmmmmmmmm? So many shadows and shafts of Southwest sun bouncing in
   through the windows and all over the floor, over the benches over the bunk
   uprights bouncing out of the freaking roar of the engine bouncing two sets
   of Gretch eyes two sets of Babbs eyes, four sets of Gretch eyes four sets
   of Babbs eyes eight sets of Gretch eyes eight sets of Babbs eyes all
   grinning vibrating bouncing in among one another carrying them both into
   an unaccountable adventure, you understand. Kesey sulks a bit-Kesey
   himself-but the sulk bounces and breaks up into Southwestern sunballs.
   Drivin' on dirt in Utah, a '46 Plymouth with an overhead cam, says
   Cassady. The refrigerator door squeaks open, gurgle gurgle, this acid O.J.
   makes a body plumb smack his lips, Hagen and his Black Witch girl friend
   hook down a cup of acid orange juice apiece and Hagen's sweet face
   spirals, turning sweet Christian boy clockwise and sweet sly Screw Shack
   counterclockwise, back and forth, and they disappear, bouncing, up the
   ladder, up through the turret hole and onto the roof where, under the
   mightily hulking sun of the Southwest and 70 miles an hour-Pretty soon
   Hagen is climbing back down the ladder and heading for the refrigerator
   and hooking down another cup of orange juice and smiling for all,
   Christian boy and Screw Shack sly, spiraling this way and that way-and
   climbing back up top the bus in order to-

   MALFUNCTION!

   If only I had $10, then we

   could split 1/2  a Ritalin order

   with Margo-I eat

   Ritalin like aspirin

   Now, let's charm Brooks Brothers-

   impressed?

   At night the goddamn bus still bouncing and the Southwest silvery blue
   coming in not exactly bouncing but slipping and sliding in shafts, sickly
   shit, and car beams and long crazy shadows from car beams sliding in weird
   bends over the inside, over the love bunk. The love bunk'll get you if you
   don't wash out. One shelf on the bunk has a sleeping bag on it and into
   this sleeping bag crawl whoever wants to make it, do your thing, bub, and
   right out front, and wail with it, and Sandy looks over and he can see a
   human . . . bobbing up and down in the sleeping bag with the car beams
   sliding over it and the motor roaring, the fabulous love bunk, and
   everyone-synch-can see that sleeping bag veritably filling up with sperm,
   the little devils swimming like mad in there in the muck, oozing into the
   cheap hairy shit they quilt the bag with, millions billions trillions of
   them, darting around, crafty little flagellants, looking to score, which
   is natural, and if any certified virgin on the face of the earth crawled
   into that sleeping bag for a nap after lunch she would be a hulking
   knocked-up miracle inside of three minutes-but won't this goddamn bouncing
   ever stop-

   THIS BEING A SCHOOL BUS, AND NOT A GREYHOUND, THE springs and the shock
   absorbers are terrible and the freaking grinding straining motor shakes it
   to pieces and hulking vibrations synched in to no creature on earth keep
   batting everybody around on the benches and the bunks. It is almost
   impossible to sleep and the days and nights have their own sickly cycle,
   blinding sun all day and the weird car beams and shadows sliding sick and
   slow at night and all the time the noise. Jane Burton is nauseous
   practically the whole time. Nobody can sleep so they keep taking more
   speed to keep going, psychic energizers like Ritalin, anything, and then
   smoke more grass to take the goddamn tachycardiac edge off the speed, and
   acid to make the whole thing turn into something else. Then it all starts
   swinging back and forth between grueling battering lurching flogging along
   the highway-and unaccountable delays, stopped, unendurable frustration by
   the side of the road in the middle of nowhere while the feeling of
   no-sleep starts turning the body and the skull into a dried-out husk
   inside with a sour greasy smoke like a tenement fire curdling in the
   brainpan. They have to pull into gasoline stations to go to the bathroom,
   cop a urination or an egestion-keep regular, friends-but 12-how many,
   14?-did we lose somebody-did we pick up somebody-climbing out of this bus,
   which is weird-looking for a start, but all these weird people are too
   much, clambering out-the service station attendant and his Number One Boy
   stare at this-Negro music is blaring out of the speakers and these weird
   people clamber out, half of them in costume, lurid shirts with red and
   white stripes, some of them with weird paint on their faces, like
   comic-book Indians, with huge circles under their eyes, eyes red, noses
   not blue, not nearly blue enough, but eyes red-all trooping out toward the
   Clean Rest Rooms, already queuing up, practically-

   "Wait a minute," the guy says. "What do you think you're doing?

   "Fill 'er up!" says Kesey, very soft and pleasant. "Yes, sir, she's a big
   bus and she takes a lotta gas. Yep."

   "I mean what are they doing?"

   "Them? I 'spect they're going to the bathroom. Ay-yup, that big old
   thing's the worst gas-eater you ever saw"-all the time motioning to Hagen
   to go get the movie camera and the microphone.

   "Well, can't all those people use the bathrooms."

   "All they want to do is go to the bathroom"-and now Kesey takes the
   microphone and Hagen starts shooting the film-whirrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr-but
   all very casual as if, well, sure, don't you record it all, every last
   morsel of friendly confrontation whenever you stop on the great American
   highway to cop a urination or two? or a dozen?

   "Well, now, listen! You ain't using the bathrooms! You hear me, now! You
   see that motel back there? I own that motel, too, and we got one septic
   tank here, for here and there, and you're not gonna overflow it for me.
   Now git that thing out of my face!"

   -Kesey has the microphone in the guy's face, like this is all for the six
   o'clock news, and then he brings the microphone back to his face, just
   like the TV interview shows, and says,

   "You see that bus out there? Every time we stop to fill 'er up we have to
   lay a whole lot of money on somebody, and we'd like it to be you, on
   account of your hospitality."

   "It's an unaccountable adventure in consumer spending," says Babbs.

   "Get those cameras and microphones out of here," the guy says. "I'm not
   afraid of you!"

   "I should hope not," says Kesey, still talking soft and down-home. "All
   that money that big baby's gonna drink up. Whew!"

   Sheerooooooo-all this time the toilets are flushing, this side and that
   side and the noise of it roars and gurgles right through the cinder block
   walls until it sounds like there's nothing in the whole wide open U.S. of
   A. except for Clean Rest Room toilets and Day-Glo crazies and cameras and
   microphones from out of nowhere, and the guy just caves in under it. He
   can't fit it into his movie of Doughty American Entrepreneur-not no kind
   of way-

   "Well, they better make it fast or there's going to be trouble around
   here." And he goes out to fill 'er up, this goddamn country is going down
   the drain.

   But they don't speed it up. Walker is over to the coin telephone putting
   in a call to Faye back in La Honda. Babbs is clowning around out on the
   concrete apron of the gas station with Gretchen Fetchin. Jane Burton feels
   bilious-the idea is to go to New York, isn't it? even on a 1939 school bus
   it could be done better than this. What are we waiting, waiting, waiting,
   waiting for, playing games with old crocks at gas stations. Well, we're
   waiting for Sandy, for one thing. Where in the hell is Sandy. But Sandy-he
   hasn't slept in days and he has an unspecific urge to get off the bus-but
   not to sleep, just to get off-for-what?-be-fore:::::what? And Sandy is
   back over at the motel, inspecting this electropink slab out in the middle
   of nowhere-somebody finally finds him and brings him back. Sandy is given
   the name Dismount in the great movie.

   "There are going to be times," says Kesey, "when we can't wait for
   somebody. Now, you're either on the bus or off the bus. If you're on the
   bus, and you get left behind, then you'll find it again. If you're off the
   bus in the first place-then it won't make a damn." And nobody had to have
   it spelled out for them. Everything was becoming allegorical, understood
   by the group mind, and especially this: "You're either on the bus ... or
   off the bus."

   EXCEPT FOR HAGEN'S GIRL, THE BEAUTY WITCH. IT SEEMS LIKE she never even
   gets off the bus to cop a urination. She's sitting back in the back of the
   bus with nothing on, just a blanket over her lap and her legs wedged back
   into the corner, her and her little bare breasts, silent, looking
   exceedingly witch-like. Is she on the bus or off the bus? She has taken to
   wearing nothing but the blanket and she sheds that when she feels like it.
   Maybe that is her thing and she is doing her thing and wailing with it and
   the bus barrels on off, heading for Houston, Texas, and she becomes Stark
   Naked in the great movie, one moment all conked out, but with her eyes
   open, staring, the next laughing and coming on, a lively Stark Naked, and
   they are all trying to just snap their fingers to it but now she is
   getting looks that have nothing to do with the fact that she has not a
   thing on, hell, big deal, but she is now waxing extremely freaking ESP.
   She keeps coming up to somebody who isn't saying a goddamn thing and
   looking into his eyes with the all-embracing look of total acid
   understanding, our brains are one brain, so let's visit, you and I, and
   she says: 'Ooooooooh, you really think  that, I know what you mean, but do
   you-u-u-u-u-u-u-u-ueeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee"-finishing off in a sailing
   tremulo laugh as if she has just read your brain and !t is the weirdest of
   the weird shit ever, your brain eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee-

   STARK-NAKED

   in a black blanket-

   Reaching out for herself,

   she woke up one morning to

   find herself accosted on all

   sides by LARGE

   MEN

   surrounding her threatening her

   with their voices, their presence, their always

   desire reaching inside herself

   and touching her obscenely upon her

   desire and causing her to laugh

   and

   LAUGH

   with the utter

   ridiculousness

   of it. . .

   -but no one denied her a moment of it, neither the conked-out bug-eyed
   paranoia nor the manic keening coming on, nobody denied her, and she could
   wail, nobody tried to cool that inflamed brain that was now seeping out
   Stark Naked into the bouncing goddamn-stop it!-currents of the bus
   throgging and roaring 70 miles an hour into Texas, for it was like it had
   been ordained, by Kesey himself, back in San Juan Capistrano, like there
   was to be a reaction scale in here, from negative to positive, and no one
   was to rise up negative about anything, one was to go positive with
   everything-go with the flow-everyone's cool was to be tested, and to shout
   No, no matter what happened, was to fail. And hadn't Kesey passed the test
   first of all? Hadn't Babbs taken Gretchen Fetchin, and did he come back at
   either one of them uptight over that? And wasn't it Walker who was calling
   La Honda from the Servicenters of America? All true, and go with the flow.
   And they went with the flow, the whole goddamn flow of America. The bus
   barrels into the superhighway toll stations and the microphones on top of
   the bus pick up all the clacking and ringing and the mumbling by the
   toll-station attendant and the brakes squeaking and the gears shifting,
   all the sounds of the true America that are screened out everywhere else,
   it all came amplified back inside the bus, while Hagen's camera picked up
   the faces, the faces in Phoenix, the cops, the service-station owners, the
   stragglers and the strugglers of America, all laboring in their movie, and
   it was all captured and kept, piling up, inside the bus. Barreling across
   America with the microphones picking it all up, the whole roar, and
   microphone up top gets eerie in a great rush and then skakkkkkkkkhkkk it
   is ripping and roaring over asphalt and thok  it's gone, no sound at all.
   The microphone has somehow ripped loose on top of the bus and hit the
   roadway and dragged along until it snapped off entirely-and Sandy can't
   believe it. He keeps waiting for somebody to tell Cassady to stop and go
   back and get the microphone, because this was something Sandy had rigged
   up with great love and time, it was his thing, his part of the power-but
   instead they are all rapping and grokking over the sound it
   made-"Wowwwwwwwww! Did you-wowwwwwww"-as if they had synched into a
   never-before-heard thing, a unique thing, the sound of an object, a
   microphone, hitting the American asphalt, the open road at 70 miles an
   hour, like if it was all there on tape they would have the instant, the
   moment, of any thing, anyone ripped out of the flow and hitting the Great
   Superhighway at 70 miles an hour-and they had it on tape-and played it
   back in variable lag skakkkkkk-akkkk-akkkk-akkkoooooooooooo.

   oooooooooooooooooooooooo-Stark Naked waxing weirder and weirder, huddled
   in the black blanket shivering, then out, bobbing wraith, her little deep
   red aureola bobbing in the crazed vibrations-finally they pull into
   Houston and head for Larry McMurtry's house. They pull up to McMurtry's
   house, in the suburbs, and the door of the house opens and out comes
   McMurtry, a slight, slightly wan, kindly-looking shy-looking guy, ambling
   out, with his little boy, his son, and Cassady opens the door of the bus
   so everybody can get off, and suddenly Stark Naked shrieks out: "Frankie!
   Frankie! Frankie! Frankie!"- this being the name of her own divorced-off
   little boy-and she whips off the blanket and leaps off the bus and out
   into the suburbs of Houston, Texas, stark naked, and rushes up to
   McMurtry's little boy and scoops him up and presses him to her skinny
   breast, crying and shrieking, "Frankie! oh Frankie! my little Frankie! oh!
   oh! oh!"-while McMurtry doesn't know what in the name of hell to do,
   reaching tentatively toward her stark-naked shoulder and saying, "Ma'am!
   Ma'am! Just a minute, ma'am!"-

   -while the Pranksters, spilling out of the bus-stop. The bus is stopped.
   No roar, no crazed bounce or vibrations, no crazed car beams, no tapes, no
   microphones. Only Stark Naked, with somebody else's little boy in her
   arms, is bouncing and vibrating.

   And there, amid the peaceful Houston elms on Quenby Road, it dawned on
   them all that this woman-which one of us even knows her?-had completed her
   trip. She had gone with the flow. She had gone stark raving mad.

                                    chapter

                                      VII

                               Unauthorized Acid

   Stark naked; stark naked; silence; but, well . . . That this or a couple
   of other crackups in the experience of the Pranksters had anything to do
   with that goofy baboon, Dope, was something that didn't cross the minds of
   the Pranksters at that point. Craziness was not an absolute. They had all
   voluntarily embarked upon a trip and a state of consciousness that was
   "crazy" by ordinary standards. The trip, in fact the whole deal, was a
   risk-all balls-out plunge into the unknown, and it was assumed merely that
   more and more of what was already inside a person would come out and
   expand, gloriously or otherwise. Stark Naked had done her thing. She
   roared off into the void and was picked up by the cops by and by, and the
   doors closed in the County psychiatric ward, and that was that, for the
   Pranksters were long gone.

   The trip had started out as a great bursting forth out of the forest
   fastness of La Honda, out into an unsuspecting America. And for Sandy,
   anyway, that was when the trip went best, when the Pranksters were out
   among them, and the citizens of the land were gawking and struggling to
   summon up the proper emotion for this-what in the name of God are the
   ninnies doing. But the opposite was happening, too. On those long
   stretches of American superhighway between performances the bus was like a
   pressure cooker, a crucible, like one of those chambers in which the early
   atomic scientists used to compress heavy water, drive the molecules closer
   and closer together until the very atoms exploded. On the bus all traces
   of freakiness or competition or bitterness or whatever were intensified.
   They were right out front, for sure.

   Jane Burton, who was now known as Generally Famished, and
   Sandy-Dis-mount-took to going off whenever they could, like in Houston,
   for a square meal. Square on every level, Tonto. They would just go right
   into one of those Square American steak houses with the big plate-glass
   window with the corny little plastic windmill in the window advertising
   Heineken's Beer and the Diners Club and American Express stickers on the
   plate-glass door and go in and have a square steak and square French fries
   and boiled bland peas and carrots and A-l sauce. Jane, now ravaged from
   lack of sleep, and ravenously hungry, generally famished, or slightly
   bilious the whole time, wondering what the hell they were now doing on the
   southern rim of the United States when New York was way up there.
   Sandy-with this subliminal urge to get off the bus, and yet be on the
   bus-on that level-and neither of them knowing what to make of Kesey-always
   Kesey ...

   AND THE HEAT. FROM HOUSTON THEY HEADED EAST THROUGH the Deep South, and
   the Deep South in July was ... lava. The air rushing into the open windows
   of the bus came in hot and gritty like invisible smoke, and when they
   stopped, it just rolled over them, pure lava. The rest in Houston didn't
   do too much good, because the heat just started it all again, nobody
   slept, and it was like all you could do to cut through the lava with speed
   and grass and acid.

   New Orleans was a relief, because they got out and walked around the
   French Quarter and down by the docks in their red and white striped shirts
   and Day-Glo stuff and the people freaked over them. And the cops came
   while they were down by the docks, which was just comic relief, because by
   now the cops were a piece of cake. The city cops were no more able to keep
   their Cop Movie going than the country cops. Hassler talked sweet to them
   like the college valedictorian and Kesey talked sweet and down-home and
   Hagen filmed it all like this was some crazed adventure in cinema verite
   and the cops skedaddled in a herd of new Ford cruisers with revolving
   turret lights. Sayonara, you all.

   They just kept walking around New Orleans in their striped shirts and
   wearing shorts, and they could all see Kesey's big muscular legs, like a
   football player's, striding on up ahead like he owned the place, like they
   all owned the place, and everybody's spirits picked up. So they head out
   to Lake Pontchartrain, on the northern edge of New Orleans. They all took
   acid, but a small dose, about 75 micrograms-everybody happy and high on
   acid, and rock 'n' roll records blaring, Martha and the Vandellas and
   Shirley Ellis, all that old stuff pounding away. Lake Pontchartrain is
   like a great big beautiful spacious-space!-park on the water. They pull
   the bus up in a parking area and there are nice trees round and all that
   endless nice water and they put on their bathing suits. Walker, who has a
   hell of a build, puts on a pair of red, yellow, and black trunks, and
   Kesey, who has a hell of a build, puts on a pair of blue and white trunks,
   and Zonker, who has a hell of a build, only leaner, puts on a pair of
   orange trunks, and the blue of the water and the scorched-out green of the
   grass and the leaves and-a little breeze?-it is all swimming in front of
   their old acid eyes like a molten postcard-water! What they don't know is,
   it is a segregated beach, for Negroes only. The spades all sitting there
   on benches sit there staring at these white crazies coming out of a weird
   bus and heading for New Or-leans 30th-parallel Deep South segregated
   water. Zonker is really zonked this time, and burning up with the heat,
   about 100 degrees, and he dives in and swims out a ways and pretty soon he
   sees he is surrounded by deep orange men, Negroes, all treading water
   around him and giving him rotten looks. One of them has a gold tooth in
   the front with a star cut out in it, so that a white enamel star shows in
   the middle of the gold, and the gold starts flashing out at him in the
   sun-cheeeakkk-in time with his heartbeat which is getting faster all the
   time, these goddamn flashes of gold and white star after-images, and the
   Golden Mouth says, "Man, there sure is a lotta trash in the water today."

   "You ain't shittin', man," says another one of them.

   "Lotta fuckin' trash, man," says another one, and so on.

   Suddenly Golden Mouth is speaking straight to Zonker: "What's all this
   trash doing in the water, man?"

   Zonker is very nonplused, partly because the whole day has turned orange
   on him, because of the acid-orange trunks, orange water, orange sky,
   orange menacing spades.

   "Boy, what you doing here!" Golden Mouth says very sharp all of a sudden.
   Orange and big and orange hulking fat back big as an orange manta ray.
   "Boy, you know what we gonna do? We gonna cut yo' little balls off. We
   gonna take you up on that beach and wail with you!"

   "Heh-hehhhhhhhhhhhh!" The others start this wailing moaning laugh.

   For some reason, however, this makes Zonker smile. He can feel it
   spreading across his face, like a big orange slice of orange sugar-jelly
   candy and he is suspended there treading water and grinning while the
   Golden Mouth flashes and flashes and flashes.

   Then the Golden Mouth says, "Well, it sure is some kinda trash," and
   starts laughing, only amiably this time, and they all laugh, and Zonker
   laughs and swims back to shore.

   By this time a big crowd of Negroes has gathered around the mad bus. Funky
   music is blasting off the speakers, a Jimmy Smith record. Zonker gets on
   the bus. It seems like thousands of Negroes are dancing around the bus,
   doing rock dances and the dirty boogie. Everything is orange and then he
   looks at the writhing mass of Negroes, out every window, nothing but
   writhing Negroes mashed in around the bus and writhing, and it all starts
   turning from orange to brown. Zonker starts getting the feeling he is
   inside an enormous intestine and it is going into peristaltic
   contractions. He can feel the whole trip turning into a horrible bummer.
   Even Kesey, who isn't afraid of anything, looks worried. "We better get
   out of here," Kesey says. But squeezed out?-in bummer brown peristaltic
   contractions? Luckily for Zonker, maybe for everybody, the white cops turn
   up at that point and break up the crowd and tell the white crazies to
   drive on, this is a segregated beach, and for once they don't pile out and
   try to break up the Cop Movie. They go with the Cop Movie and get their
   movie out of there.

   ON INTO THE FLATLANDS OF MISSISSIPPI AND ALABAMA, Biloxi, Mobile, U.S.
   Route 90, the flatlands and the fields and the heat doesn't let up ever.
   They are heading for Florida. Sandy hasn't slept in days:::::how
   many:::::like total insomnia and everything is bending in curvy curdling
   lines. Sun and flatlands. So damned hot-and everything is getting torn
   into opposites. The dead-still heat-stroked summertime deep Southland-and
   Sandy's heart racing at a constant tachycardia and his brain racing and
   reeling out and so essential to... keep moving, Cassady!... but there are
   two Cassadys. One minute Cassady looks 58 and crazy-speed!-and the next,
   28 and peaceful-acid-and Sandy can tell the peaceful Cassady in an
   instant, because his nose becomes... long and smooth and almost patrician,
   whereas the wild Cassady looks beat-up. And Kesey-always Kesey! Sandy
   looks. .. and Kesey is old and haggard and his face is lopsided ... and
   then Sandy looks and Kesey is young, serene, and his face is lineless, and
   round and smooth as a baby's as he sits for hours on end reading comic
   books, absorbed in the plunging purple Steve Ditko shadows of Dr. Strange
   attired in capes and chiaroscuro, saying: "How could they have known that
   this gem was merely a device to bridge dimensions! It was a means to enter
   the dread purple dimension-from our own world!" Sandy may wander .. . off
   the bus, but it remains all Kesey. Dr. Strange! Always seeing two Keseys.
   Kesey the Prankster and Kesey the organizer. Going through the steams of
   southern Alabama in late June and Kesey rises up from out of the comic
   books and becomes Captain Flag. He puts on a pink kilt, like a miniskirt,
   and pink socks and patent-leather shoes and pink sunglasses and wraps an
   American flag around his head like a big turban and holds it in place with
   an arrow through the back of it and gets up on top of the bus roaring
   through Alabama and starts playing the flute at people passing by. The
   Alabamans drawn into the PINK DIMENSION do a double-freak take for sure
   and it is Too Much! as George Walker always says, too mullyfogging much.
   They pull into a gas station in Mobile and half the Pranksters jump out of
   the bus, blazing red and white stripes and throwing red rubber balls
   around in a crazed way like a manic ballet of slick Servicenter flutter
   decoration while the guy fills up the tank, and he looks from them to
   Captain Flag to the bus itself, and after he collects for the gas he looks
   through the window at Cassady in the driver's seat and shakes his head and
   says:

   "No wonder you're so nigger-heavy in California."
   FORNIA-FORNIA-FORNIA-FORNIA-FORNIA-FOR-NIA-FORNIA-FORNIA as it picked up
   inside the bus in variable lag, and that breaks everybody up.

   That was when it was good ... grinding on through Alabama, and then
   suddenly, to Sandy, Kesey is old and haggard and the organizer. Sandy can
   see him descending the ladder down from the roof of the bus and glowering
   at him, and he knows-intersubjectivity!-that Kesey is thinking. You're too
   detached, Sandy, you're not out front, you may be sitting right here
   grinding and roaring through Alabama but you're ... off the bus ... And he
   approaches Sandy, hunched over under the low ceiling of the bus, and to
   Sandy he looks like an ape with his mighty arms dangling, like The
   Incredible Hulk, and suddenly Sandy jumps up and crouches into an ape
   position, dangling his arms and mimicking him-and Kesey breaks into a big
   grin and throws his arms around Sandy and hugs him-

   He approves! Kesey approves of me! At last I have responded to something,
   brought it all out front, even if it is resentment, done something, done
   my thing-and in that very action, just as he taught, it is gone, the
   resentment... and I am back on the bus again, synched in .. .

   Always Kesey! And in that surge of euphoria-Kesey approves!-Sandy knew
   that Kesey was the key to whatever was going right and whatever was going
   wrong on this trip, and nobody, not one of them who ever took this trip,
   got in this movie, would ever have even the will to walk up to Kesey and
   announce irrevocably: I am off the bus. It would be like saying, I am off
   this... Unspoken Thing we are into ...

   PENSACOLA, FLORIDA. 110 DEGREES. A FRIEND OF BABBS HAS A little house near
   the ocean, and they pull in there, but the ocean doesn't help at all. The
   heat makes waves in the air, like over a radiator. Most of the Pranksters
   are in the house or out in the yard. Some of the girls are outside the bus
   barbecuing some meat. Sandy is by himself inside the bus, in the shade.
   The insomnia is killing him. He has got to get some sleep or keep moving.
   He can't stand it in here stranded in between with his heart pounding. He
   goes to the refrigerator and takes out the orange juice. The acid in New
   Orleans, the 75 micrograms, wasn't enough. It's like he hasn't had a good
   high the whole trip, nothing ... blissful. So he hooks down a big slug of
   Unauthorized Acid and sits back.

   He would like something nice and peaceful, closed in softly alone on the
   bus. He puts on a set of earphones. The left earphone is hooked into a
   microphone inside the house and picks up Kesey's cousin Dale playing the
   piano. Dale, for all his country ways, has studied music a long time and
   plays well and the notes come in like liquid drops of amethyst vibrating
   endlessly in the . .. acid . . . atmosphere and it is very nice. The right
   earphone is hooked into a microphone picking up the sounds outside the
   house, mainly the barbecue fires crackling. So Dale concerto and fire
   crackling in these big padded earphones closed in about his head ... only
   the sounds are somehow sliding out of control. There is no synch. It is as
   if the two are fighting for his head. The barbecue crackles and bubbles in
   his head and the amethyst droplets crystallize into broken glass, and then
   tin, a tin piano. The earphones seem to get bigger and bigger, huge padded
   shells about to enclose his whole head, his face, his nose-amok sound
   overpowering him, as if it is all going to end right here inside this
   padded globe-panic-he leaps up from the seat, bolts a few feet with the
   earphones still clamped on his skull, then rips them off and jumps out of
   the bus-Pranksters everywhere in the afternoon sun, in red and white
   striped shirts. Babbs has the power and is directing the movie and is
   trying to shoot something-Acid Piper. Sandy looks about. Nobody he can
   tell it to, that he has taken acid by himself and it is turning into a
   bummer, he can't bring this out front... He runs into the house, the walls
   keep jumping up so goddamn close and all the angles are under extreme
   stress, as if they could break. Jane Burton is sitting alone in the house,
   feeling bilious. Jane is the only person he can tell.

   "Jane," he says, "I took some acid ... and it's really weird ..." But it
   is such an effort to talk ...

   The heat waves are solidifying in the air like the waves in a child's
   marble and the perspectives are all berserk, walls rushing up then sinking
   way back like a Titian banquet hall. And the heat-Sandy has to do
   something to pull himself together, so he takes a shower. He undresses and
   gets in the shower and ... flute music, Babbs! flute music comes spraying
   out of the nozzle and the heat is inside of him, it is like he can look
   down and see it burning there and he looks down, two bare legs, a torso
   rising up at him and like he is just noticing them for the first time.
   They exist apart from, like another human being's, such odd turns and
   angles they take amid the flute streams, swells and bony processes, like
   he has never seen any of this before, this flesh, this stranger. He groks
   over that-only it isn't a stranger, it is his . . . mother . .. and
   suddenly he is back in this body, only it is his mother's body-and then
   his father's-he has become his mother and his father. No difference
   between I and Thou inside this shower of flutes on the Florida littoral.
   He wrenches the water off, and it stops the flute. He is himself
   again-hide from the panic-no, gotcha-and he pulls on his clothes and goes
   back out in the living room. Jane is still sitting there. Talk, christ, to
   somebody-Jane!-but the room goes into the zooms, wild lurches of
   perspective, a whole side of the room zooming right up in front of his
   face, then zooming back to where it was-Jane!-Jane in front of his face, a
   foot away, then way back over there on the sofa, then zooming up again,
   all of it rocketing back and forth in the hulking heat-"Sandy!"-somebody
   is in the house looking for him, Hagen? who is it?-seems Babbs wants him
   in the movie. Red-and-white striped Pranksters burning in the sun. Seems
   Babbs has an idea for a section of the movie. In this scene Babbs is the
   Pied Piper, tootling on a flute, and all the red-and-white striped
   children are running after him in colorful dances. They hand Sandy a
   Prankster shirt, which he doesn't want. It is miles too big. It hangs on
   him in this sick loose way like he is desiccating in the sun. Into the
   sun-the shirt starts flashing under his face in the sun in explosive beams
   of sunball red and sunball silver-white as if he is moving through an aura
   of violent beams. Babbs gives him his cue and he starts a crazy dance out
   by a clothesline while the camera whirrs away. He can feel the crazy look
   come over his face and feel his eyeballs turning up and white with just
   vague flashes of red and silver-white exploding in under his eyelids...
   and the freaking heat, dancing like a crazy in the sun, and he goes
   reeling off to one side.

   It becomes very important that nobody know he has taken Unauthorized Acid.
   He can trust Jane ... This is not very out front, but he must remain very
   cool. Chuck Kesey is marching around the yard blowing a tuba, going boop
   boop a boop boop very deep and loud, then he comes by Sandy and looks at
   him and smiles over the mouthpiece and goes bup bup a bup bup, very tender
   and soft and-intersubjectivity!-he knows and understands-and that is nice
   because Chuck is one of the nicest people in the world and Sandy can trust
   him. If only he can remain cool...

   There is a half pound of grass in a tin can by the bus and Sandy gets down
   on all fours to help and starts digging his playing in the sun, and he
   somehow kicks over the can and the grass spills all over this silty brown
   dirt. Everybody is upset and Hagen gets down to try to separate the grass
   from the dirt, and Sandy gets down on all fours to help and starts digging
   his fingers into the dirt to try to dig out the grass, only as he starts
   digging, the dirt gets browner and browner as he digs, and he starts
   grooving over the brownness of it, so brown, so deep, so rich, until he is
   digging way past the grass, on down into the ground, and Hagen says,

   "Hey! What the hell's the matter with you?"

   And Sandy knows he should just come out with it and say, I'm stoned man,
   and this brown is a groove, and then it would be all out front and over
   with. But he can't bring himself to do it, he can't bring himself all the
   way out front. Instead, it gets worse.

   Kesey comes over with a football and a spray can of Day-Glo. He wants
   Sandy to spray it Day-Glo, and then he and Babbs and some others are going
   to take it out near the water at dusk and pass the Day-Glo ball around,
   and Sandy starts spraying it, only it's all one thing, the ball and
   Kesey's arm, and he is spraying Kesey's arm in the most dedicated, cool
   way, and Kesey says:

   "Hey! What the hell's the matter with you-"

   And as soon as he says it, he knows, which is suddenly very bad.

   "I'm ... stoned," says Sandy. "I took some acid, and I . .. took too much
   and it's going very bad."

   "We wanted to save that acid for the trip back," Kesey says. "We wanted to
   have some for the Rockies."

   "I didn't take that much"-he's trying to explain it, but now a Beatles
   record is playing over the loudspeaker of the bus and it's raining into
   his head like needles-"but it's bad."

   Kesey looks exasperated, but he tries some condolence. "Look-just stay
   with it. Listen to the music-"

   "Listen to the music!" Sandy yells. "Christ! Try and stop me!"

   Kesey says very softly: "I know how you feel, Sandy. I've been there
   myself. But you just have to stay with it"-which makes Sandy feel good:
   he's with me. But then Kesey says, "But if you think I'm going to be your
   guide for this trip, you're sadly mistaken." And he walks off.

   Sandy starts feeling very paranoid. He walks off, away from the house, and
   comes upon some sort of greeny glade in the woods. Babbs and Gretchen
   Fetchin are lying on the ground in the shade, just lazing on it, but
   Babb's legs shift and his arms move and Gretch's legs shift, and Sandy
   sees ... Babbs and Gretch in a pond, swimming languidly. He knows they are
   on ground, and yet they are in the water-and he says,

   "How is it?"

   "Wet!" says Babbs.

   -and-marvelous-it is very nice-as if Babbs knows exactly what is in his
   mind-synch-and is going to swing with it. We are all one brain out here
   and we are all on the bus, after all. And suddenly there in the Florida
   glade it is like the best of the whole Prankster thing all over again.

   He came back to the house at dark, into the yard, and there were a million
   stars in the sky, like tiny neon bulbs, and you could see them between the
   leaves of the trees, and the trees seemed to be covered with a million
   tiny neon bulbs, and the bus, it broke up into a sculpture of neon bulbs,
   millions of them massed together to make a bus, like a whole nighttime of
   neon dust, with every particle a neon bulb, and they all vibrated like a
   huge friendly neon cicada universe.

   He goes down to the water where the Pranksters all are, a little inlet,
   and it is dark and placid and he gets in and wades out until the water
   laps almost even with his mouth, which makes it very secure and warm and
   calm and nice and he looks at the stars and then at a bridge in the
   distance. All he can see of the bridge is the lights on it, swooping
   strands of lights, rising, rising, rising-and just then Chuck Kesey comes
   gliding toward him through the water, smiling, like a great friendly fish.
   Chuck knows and it is very nice-and the lights of the bridge keep rising,
   rising, until they merge with the stars, until there is a bridge leading
   right up into heaven.

                                    chapter

                                      VIII

                            Tootling the Multitudes

   IN GEORGIA THEY PULLED OVER TO THE SIDE OF THE HIGH-way at a rest area, by
   a lake. Old Brother John put on a Robin Hood hat and sang a lot of salty
   songs and got the MDT Award, Most Disgusting Trip. Babbs nailed a baby
   doll up on a post and painted it Day-Glo and nailed a lot of nails through
   it and burnt it, and he got an MDT Award, too. Then something happened
   that made Sandy very happy. He got the idea of spraying his hand in
   Day-Glo designs and getting in the water and then rushing up out of the
   water with his hand stretched out toward Hagen's movie camera so the film
   would show an enormous Day-Glo hand rushing up in frantic foreshortening.
   Everybody grooved on that and started doing it, and Sandy felt like he now
   shared part of the power. Everybody started painting one hand Day-Glo and
   opening it and sticking one vast vibrating Day-Glo palm out at the
   straight world floating by comatose .. . Kesey held another briefing, and
   without anybody having to say anything, they all began to feel that the
   trip was becoming a ... mission, of some sort. Kesey said he wanted them
   all to do their thing and be Pranksters, but he wanted them to be deadly
   competent, too. Like with the red rubber balls they were always throwing
   around when they got out of the bus. The idea of the red rubber balls was
   that every Prankster should always be ready to catch the ball, even if he
   wasn't looking when it came at him. They should always be that alert,
   always that alive to the moment, always that deep in the whole group
   thing, and be deadly competent.

   Well, one Prankster who was proving out deadly competent was Cassady. They
   highballed on up the Eastern seaboard to New York, and highballing was
   about it. Cassady had never been in better form. By this time everybody
   who had any reservations about Cassady had forgotten it. Cassady had been
   a rock on this trip, the totally dependable person. When everybody else
   was stroked out with fatigue or the various pressures, Cassady could still
   be counted on to move. It was as if he never slept and didn't need to. For
   all his wild driving he always made it through the last clear oiled gap in
   the maze, like he knew it would be there all the time, which it always
   was. When the bus broke down, Cassady dove into the ancient innards and
   fixed it. He changed tires, lugging and heaving and jolting and bolting,
   with his fantastic muscles popping out striation by striation and his
   basilic veins gorged with blood and speed.

   Coming up over the Blue Ridge Mountains everybody was stoned on acid,
   Cassady included, and it was at that moment that he decided to make it all
   the way down the steepest, awfulest windingest mountain highway in the
   history of the world without using the brakes. The lurid bus started
   barreling down the Blue Ridge Mountains of Virginia. Kesey was up on top
   of the bus to take it all in. He was up there and he could feel the motion
   of the thing careening around the curves and the road rippling and
   writhing out in front of him like someone rippling a bull-whip. He felt
   totally synched with Cassady, however. It was as if, if he were panicked,
   Cassady would be panicked, panic would rush through the bus like an
   energy. And yet he never felt panic. It was an abstract thought. He had
   total faith in Cassady, but it was more than faith. It was as if Cassady,
   at the wheel, was in a state of satori, as totally into this very moment,
   Now, as a being can get, and for that moment they all shared it.

   THEY REACHED NEW YORK IN THE MIDDLE OF JULY, AND THEY were like horses in
   the home stretch. Everybody felt good. They tooled across 42nd Street and
   up Central Park West with the speakers blaring and even New York had to
   stop and stare. The Pranksters gave them the Day-Glo glad hands, Kesey and
   Babbs got up on top of the bus with their red-and-white striped shirts on
   and tootled the people. This tootling had gotten to be a thing where you
   got on top of the bus and played people like they were music, the poor
   comatose world outside. If a guy looked at you fat and pissed off, you
   played on the flute in dying elephant tones. If a woman looked up nervous
   and twittering, you played nervous and twittering. It was saying it right
   to their faces, out front, and they never knew what to do. And New
   York-what a dirge New York was. The town was full of solemn, spent,
   irritable people shit-kicking their way down the sidewalks. A shit kicker
   is a guy with a frown on and his eyes on the ground, sloughing forward
   with his shoes scuffing the pavement like he's kicking horseshit out of
   the way saying oh that this should happen to me. The shit kickers gave
   them many resentful looks, which was the Pranksters' gift to the shit
   kickers. They could look up at the bus and say those are the bastids who
   are causing it, all the shit. They pulled into the big driveway out front
   of the Tavern on the Green, a big restaurant in Central Park, and tootled
   the people there. One way or another they were drawing the whole freaking
   town into their movie, and Hagen got it all on film.

   One of the old Perry Lane crowd, Chloe Scott, had arranged to get them an
   apartment of some friends of hers who were away for the summer, up on
   Madison Avenue at 90th Street. They parked the bus out front and had a
   time for themselves. Cassady looked up all his old pals from the On the
   Road days. Two of them were Jack Kerouac and Allen Ginsberg.

   They gave a party up at the apartment at Madison and 90th and Kerouac and
   Ginsberg were there. A guy also showed up saying, Hi, I'm Terry Southern
   and this is my wife Carol. He was a pretty funny guy and talked a blue
   streak most amiably. It was a week before they found out he wasn't Terry
   Southern and didn't even look like him. It was just some guy's little
   freaky prank and they were glad they had gone ahead and wailed with it.
   Kesey and Kerouac didn't say much to each other. Here was Kerouac and here
   was Kesey and here was Cassady in between them, once the mercury for
   Kerouac and the whole Beat Generation and now the mercury for Kesey and
   the whole-what?-something wilder and weirder out on the road. It was like
   hail and farewell. Kerouac was the old star. Kesey was the wild new comet
   from the West heading christ knew where.

   Sometimes a Great Notion came out and the reviews ran from the very best
   to the very worst. In the daily New York Herald Tribune, Maurice Dolbier
   said: "In the fiction wilderness, this is a towering redwood." Granville
   Hicks said: "In his first novel, One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest, Ken
   Kesey demonstrated that he was a forceful, inventive and ambitious writer.
   All of these qualities are exhibited, in even higher degree, in Sometimes
   a Great Notion. Here he has told a fascinating story in a fascinating
   way." John Barkham of the Saturday Review said: "A novelist of unusual
   talent and imagination ... a huge, turbulent tale ..." Time said it was a
   big novel-but that it was overwritten and had failed. Some of the critics
   seemed put out with the back-woodsy, arch, yep-bub-golly setting of the
   novel and the unusual theme of the heroic strikebreaker and the craven
   union men. Leslie Fiedler wrote an ambivalent review in the Herald
   Tribune's Book Week, but in any case it was a long, front-page review by a
   major critic. Newsweek  said the book "rejects the obligations of art and
   therefore ends up as a windy, detailed mock-epic barrel-chested
   counterfeit of life." Orville Prescott in The New York Times called it "A
   Tiresome Literary Disaster" and said: "His monstrous book is the most
   insufferably pretentious and the most totally tiresome novel I have had to
   read in many years." He referred to Kesey as "a beatnik type" who had been
   the model for Dean Moriarty in Kerouac's On the Road, confusing Kesey with
   Cassady. The Pranksters got a good laugh over that. The old guy was mixed
   up and ... maybe put out by the whole thing of the bus and the big assault
   upon New York: stop the Huns...

   But the hell with it. Kesey was already talking about how writing was an
   old-fashioned and artificial form and pointing out, for all who cared to
   look . . . the bus. The local press, including some of the hipper, smaller
   sheets, gave it a go, but nobody really comprehended what was going on,
   except that it was a party. It was a party, all right. But in July of 1964
   not even the hip world in New York was quite ready for the phenomenon of a
   bunch of people roaring across the continental U.S.A. in a bus covered
   with swirling Day-Glo mandalas aiming movie cameras and microphones at
   every freaking thing in this whole freaking country while Neal Cassady
   wheeled the bus around the high curves like Super Hud and the U.S. nation
   streamed across the windshield like one of those goddamned Cinemascope
   landscape cameras that winds up your optic nerves like the rubber band in
   a toy airplane and let us now be popping more speed and acid and smoking
   grass as if it were all just coming out of Cosmo the Prankster god's own
   local-option gumball machines-

   Cosmo!

   Furthur.

                                    chapter

                                       IX

                                 The Crypt Trip

   IF THERE WAS ANYBODY IN THE WORLD WHO WAS GOING TO comprehend what the
   Pranksters were doing, it was going to be Timothy Leary and his group, the
   League for Spiritual Discovery, up in Millbrook, New York. Leary and his
   group had been hounded out of Harvard, out of Mexico, out of here, out of
   there, and had finally found a home in a big Victorian mansion in
   Millbrook, on private land, an estate belonging to a wealthy New York
   family, the Hitchcocks. So the bus headed for Millbrook.

   They headed off expecting the most glorious reception ever. It is probably
   hard at this late date to understand how glorious they thought it was
   going to be. The Pranksters thought of themselves and Leary's group as two
   extraordinary arcane societies, and the only ones in the world, engaged in
   the most fantastic experiment in human consciousness ever devised. The
   thing was totally new. And now the two secret societies bearing this
   new-world energy surge were going to meet.

   The Pranksters entered the twisty deep green Gothic grounds of Millbrook
   with flags flying, American flags all over the bus, and the speakers
   blaring rock 'n' roll, on in over the twisty dirt road, through the
   tangled greeny thickets, past the ponds and glades, like a rolling
   yahooing circus. When they got in sight of the great gingerbread mansion
   itself, all towers and turrets and jigsaw shingles, Sandy Lehmann-Haupt
   started throwing green smoke bombs off the top of the bus, great booms and
   blooms of green smoke exploding off the sides of the bus like epiphytes as
   the lurid thing rolled and jounced around the curves. We are here ! We are
   here !

   The Pranksters expected the Learyites to come rolling out of the house
   like the survivors of the siege of Khartoum. Instead-a couple of figures
   there on the lawn dart back into the house. The Pranksters stop in front
   and there is just the big house sitting there sepulchral and Gothic-and
   them jumping off the bus still yahooing and going like hell. Finally a few
   souls materialize. Peggy Hitchcock and Richard Alpert and Susan Metzner,
   the wife of Dr. Ralph Metzner, another leading figure in the Leary group.
   Alpert looks the bus up and down and shakes his head and says, "Ke-n-n-n
   Ke-e-e-esey ..." as if to say I might have known that you would be the
   author of this collegiate prank. They are friendly, but it is a mite ...
   cool here, friends. Maynard Ferguson, the jazz trumpet player, and his
   wife, Flo, are there, and they groove over the bus, but the others . . .
   there is a general. . . vibration ... of: We have something rather deep
   and meditative going on here, and you California crazies are a sour note.

   Finally, Peggy Hitchcock invites some of them over to her house, a big
   modern house, known as The Bungalow, off from the gingerbread manse. Babbs
   is one of them. Babbs and the Pranksters are not ready for a lazy
   afternoon in the country, meditative or not. Inside The Bungalow, Babbs
   came upon a big framed photograph on the wall, looking like a Yale class
   picture from the year '03, a lot of young fellers seated, in tiers, in a
   clump and staring full-face at the camera.

   "There's Cassady!" says Babbs.

   "There's Hassler!"

   "There's Kesey!"

   "There's Sandy!"

   They found every single man on the bus in the picture, while the Learyites
   looked on, tolerantly, and Babbs got the idea of "The Pranksters'
   Ancestral Mansion."

   The Learyites were going to take them on a tour of the great gingerbread
   mansion, but it became Babbs's tour. He started leading it.

   "Now ladies and gentlemen," he said, "we are embarked upon the first
   annual tour of the Pranksters' Ancestral Mansion. Now over here you may
   regard"-he points to a big lugubrious oil portrait, or something of the
   sort, up on the wall-"one of the Pranksters' great forefathers, sire and
   scion of the fabulous line, the fabulous lion, Sir Edward the Freak. Sir
   Edward the Freak, a joke in his own time. I've heard if he got aroused, he
   would freak a whole block of city, Sir Edward the Freak-"

   -and so on, while the Learyites tagged along, looking more and more dour,
   as if they sensed disaster, Babbs looking more and more animated, rapping
   off everything, the ancestral staircase, the ancestral paneling, the
   ancestral fireplace, his rheostat eyes turning up to 300 watts-

   -then down to one of the four "meditation centers," little sanctums where
   the Learyites retreated for the serious business of meditation upon inner
   things-

   "-and now, for this part of our tour, the Crypt Trip-" And the Pranksters
   started rapping off the Crypt Trip, while Babbs entered into a parody
   rendition of The Tibetan Book of the Dead. This was one of the Learyites'
   most revered texts. "This is where we take our followers to hang them up
   when they're high," says Babbs, "the Crypt Trip." The clear message was
   Fuck you, Mill-brook, for your freaking frostiness.

   Other Pranksters were out playing under a little waterfall in the woods.
   Zonker's girl friend Kathy, whom he had picked up in New York, sat under
   the waterfall and the water pasted her bikini, or her bra and panties, or
   whatever it was she had on, pasted it most nicely to her body and Hagen
   filmed it. She became Sensuous X in the great movie.

   Where was Leary? Everyone was waiting for the great meeting of Leary and
   Kesey.

   Well, word came down that Leary was upstairs in the mansion engaged in a
   very serious experiment, a three-day trip, and could not be disturbed.

   Kesey wasn't angry, but he was very disappointed, even hurt. It was
   unbelievable-this was Millbrook, one big piece of uptight constipation,
   after all this.

   The Pranksters made a few more stabs at getting things going around
   Millbrook, but it seemed like everybody in the place was retreating to
   some corner or other. Finally they pulled out. Before they left, Kesey
   asked Alpert if he could get them some more acid. He said he couldn't, but
   he could give them some morning-glory seeds. Morning-glory seeds. The idea
   of morning-glory seeds sloshing around in your belly like a ptomaine bean
   bag while the bus bounced and shook and swayed and leaned out on the
   curves was more than a body could bear. So thanks anyway, and sayonara,
   you all, League for Spiritual Discovery.

                                    chapter

                                       X

                                   Dream Wars

   ON THE TRIP BACK WEST THEY TOOK THE NORTHERN ROUTE, through Ohio, Indiana,
   Illinois, Wisconsin, Minnesota, South Dakota-

   South Dakota! 191 miles in South Dakota ...

   -which made it all cooler, for a start... In fact, the trip back was a
   psychic Cadillac, a creamy groove machine, and they soon found themselves
   grooving in a group mind. Now they could leave behind all the mind-blown
   freaky binds and just keep going Furthur! on the bus. For example, Zonker
   meant to stay in New York but he went back with them. He couldn't break
   off from the group mind takeoff that had begun, the Unspoken Thing, the
   all-in-one ... He brought with him his gorgeous blond telepathic girl
   friend Kathy, who felt at once the careening, crazydreaming, creamy
   bobbing rhythm of the bus and became at once recklessly and infectiously
   and insenescibly and ultra-infra-sexily one of them: most sinuous
   Prankstress in their ranks. The Pranksters named her Sensuous X, glowing
   girl friend resolutely going ... Furthur ... Kesey laid eyes on the
   Sensuous horizon-loved it! On the bus. Next, she became Zonker's sensuous
   ex-lost her! On the bus. At first Zonker's mad, feels he's been
   had-affront! But then thanks to his feeling for the Prankster experiment,
   he sees nothing to resent. There can be no hard feelings when one is
   dealing totally out front on the bus.

   There was very little LSD left, so they were taking mostly speed and
   grass, soaring through the Northlands, on Speed. For Sandy-at Millbrook a
   Main Guru had taken Sandy and Jane aside and confided: It would be good if
   you took the Millbrook trip alone ... meaning, probably, without your
   obstreperous companions, i.e., off the bus, and Sandy had... Dis-Mounted
   again and returned to Millbrook, with Jane, and the Main Guru turned him
   on to DMT, a 30-minute trip like LSD but with a fierce roan-mad
   intensity-fragments! Sandy had a mad sense of the world torn apart into
   stained-glass shards behind his eyelids. No matter what he did, eyes open,
   eyes shut, the world erupted into electric splinters and the Main Guru
   said, "I wish to enter your metaphysical soul." But to Sandy-paranoia!-he
   seemed like a randy-painted lulu bent on his rectococcygeal shoals, a
   randy boy-enjoyer, while the world exploded and there was no antidote for
   this rocketing, rocketing, rocketing, rocketing... They returned to New
   York and Jane disembarked from the bus, stayed behind, but Sandy felt
   impelled to ride it out on the bus with the rest of the Pranksters,
   heading west, rocketing, rocketing, rocketing, rocketing Furthur ... And
   now in the Midwest it ' was as if the DMT trip at Millbrook had been the
   last stage of a rocket and his whole psyche was now committed to speed and
   motion, and it was necessary to keep soaring through the Northlands.
   Certain vibrations of the bus would trip his brain somehow and suddenly
   bring back the sensation of the rocketing DMT trip and it would be
   necessary to speed up and keep moving. The sweet wheatfields and dairy
   lands of America would be sailing by beauty rural green and curving, and
   Sandy is watching the serene beauty of it... and then he happens to look
   into the big rear-view mirror outside the bus and-the fields are-in flames
   :::::::: curve and curdle straight up in hideous orange flames ::::: So he
   whips his head around and looks way back as far as he can see and over
   over to the horizon and it is nothing but flat and sweet and green again,
   sailing by serene. Then he looks back into the mirror-and the flames shoot
   up again, soaring, corn and lespedeza turning brown like burning color
   film when the projector is too hot and bursting into flames, corn, wheat,
   lespedeza turning into brown scouring rush, death camass, bloodwort, wild
   iris, blue flag, grease wood, poison sucklyea, monkshood mandrake,
   moonseed, fitweed, locoweed, tumble mustard, spurge nettle, coyote
   tobacco, crab's eye bursting into flames-a sea of flames-a mirror with a
   sea of flames, Narcissus, Moon, twins, thesis and anti-thesis, infirmity
   of life, as if he is forced to endure at any moment the visual revelation
   of a pa-leopsychic mystery-and Sandy looks away and forces himself not to
   look toward the rearview mirror and once again just sun and the green
   belly of America sailing by . ..

   ... serene. Certain things worked smoothly on every level. They knew how
   to run the bus better, for one thing, even though Cassady had had to go
   back ahead of time by car with Hassler, who had to report back to Fort
   Ord. The Pranksters took turns driving. Getting food, copping urinations,
   shooting the movie, making tapes-they managed it all like a team. Once a
   few minor personal hassles were worked out-out front-and the bus crossed
   the Mississippi, and they were way out West-then it all merged into the
   Group Mind and became very psychic . . .

   Intersubjectivity!

   .. . Sandy himself wheeling the bus through dour Roosian South Dakota with
   cold shadows sweeping over the green and golden grasslands. No sea of
   flames now, just a green and gold sea, serene, coming from out of the
   stream of the Northlands themselves-and sleep means nothing, because there
   is no time, only Now, a perfect experience in the perfect momentum set
   perfectly by his foot on the accelerator-for 191 miles he drove, by the
   speedometer. Then he goes to the back of the bus and there up on the
   ceiling is a map of the U.S. pasted up there, and-see!-there is a red line
   on the map, leaping out on, and it is exactly those 191 miles he drove,
   glowing on the ceiling of the bus. He looks around, starts asking, very
   excited-and Sensuous X said she made the line-

   "Why!"

   Sensuous doesn't know. No why to it. She just had the crayon and that was
   where the line went-

   -but no need to explain. Telepathic Kathy ! Just one line, one current,
   running through the entire bus. Group Mind, and Cosmic Control, on the bus
   ...

   Then the bus heads up into Canada, to Calgary, to catch the Calgary
   Stampede. The unquenchable Hagen of the Screw Shack prowls the Stampede
   for ginch ahoof and comes back to the bus with nice little girl with lips
   as raunchy as a swig of grape soda, tender in age but ne'mind, ready to
   go, and she is on the bus, christened Anonymous, down to her bra and
   panties, which she prefers. The call goes out to the Canadian Royal
   Mounties for the runaway, or stowaway, the little girl from the Stampede,
   and they stop the bus in the road check-

   -Why, come right on in, officers, take a look around-

   -while Hagen grinds the camera at them-

   -while the Head Mountie rereads the long description, five feet two, dark
   hair, etc., and checks out Sensuous X and Gretch and Anonymous in the
   window-

   -Anonymous reads the description over the Mountie's shoulder, perched up
   at the window, and laughs merrily at such a funny-sounding girl-she by now
   having her face all painted up in Prankster designs and half her
   grape-soda body as well so that she doesn't look too much like the pretty
   helpless waif Grandma described to the Mounties, and the Mounties wave
   them by and peer on down the road for the next.

   Next down to Boise, Idaho, and everywhere Kesey and Babbs up top the bus
   with flutes, mercilessly tootling the people of America as they crowd
   around the bus and getting pretty good at it even. Winces here and there
   as some little cringing shell in the population pinioned in his crispy
   black shiny shoes knows, no mistake, that it is him they have singled
   out-they are playing my song, the desperate sound track from my movie-and
   Kesey and Babbs score again and again, like the legendary Zen archers, for
   they no longer play their music at people but inside them. They play
   inside them, oh merciless flow. And many things are clear in the flow.
   They are above the multitudes, looking down from the Furthur heights of
   the bus, and the billion eyes of America glisten at them like electric
   kernels, and yet the Pranksters are grooving with this whole wide-screen
   America and going with its flow with American flags flying from the bus
   and taking energy, as in solar heat, from its horsepower and its neon and
   there is no limit to the American trip. Bango!-that's it!-the trouble with
   Leary and his group is that they have turned back. But of course! They
   have turned back into that old ancient New York intellectual thing, ducked
   back into the romantic past, copped out of the American trip. New York
   intellectuals have always looked for . .. another country, a fatherland of
   the mind, where it is all better and more philosophic and purer,
   gadget-free, and simpler and pedigreed: France or England, usually-oh, the
   art of living, in France, boys. The Learyites have done the same thing,
   only with them it's-India-the East-with all the ancient flap-doodle of
   Gautama Buddha or the Rig-Veda blowing in like mildew, and Leary calls for
   blue grass growing in the streets of New York, and he decrees that
   everyone should have such a dwelling place of such pristine antique decor,
   with everyone hunkered down amid straw rugs and Paisley wall hangings,
   that the Gautama Buddha himself from 485 b.c. could walk in and feel at
   home instantly. Above all, keep quiet, for God's sake, hold it down,
   whisper, moan, mumble, meditate, and for chris-sake, no gadgets-no tapes,
   video tapes, TV, movies, Hagstrom electric basses, variable lags, American
   flags, no neon, Buick Electras, mad moonstone-faced Servicenters, and no
   manic buses, f r chrissake, soaring, doubledyclutch doubledyclutch, to the
   Westernmost edge-

   And in Boise they cut through a funeral or wedding or something, so many
   dressed-up people in the sun gawking at Pranksters gathered at a fountain
   and all cutting up in the sunspots, and a kid-they have tootled his song,
   and he likes it, and he runs for the bus and they all pile on and pull
   out, just ahead of him, and he keeps running for the bus, and Kesey keeps
   slowing down and then pulling out just out of his reach, six or eight
   blocks this way, and then they speed up for good, and they can still see
   him floating away in the background, his legs still running, like a
   preview-

   -allegory of life!-

   -of the multitudes who very shortly will want to get on the bus . . .
   themselves . . .

   Back at Kesey's in La Honda,

   Deep into the rusky-dusky neon dusty,

   More synched in than

   They had ever been,

   Deep into the Unspoken Thing,

   The Pranksters now aligned

   Along a sheerly dividing line:

   Before the bus and

   After the bus,

   On the bus or

   Off the bus,

   A sheerly Diluvial divide:

   Did you take the Epoch Ride?

   One-way ticket into the nirvana thickets

   Of the ex redwood cathedra Unspoken Thing.

   Most peaceful synching in,

   Serene bacchanal

   For all...

   ... except Sandy. For Sandy, the bus had stopped but he hadn't. It was as
   if the bus had hit a wall and he had shot out the window and was living in
   the suspended interminable moment before he hit-what? He didn't know. All
   he knew was that there would be a crash unless the momentum of the
   Pranksters suddenly resumed and caught up with him the way the Flash, in
   the Pranksters' ubiquitous comic books, caught speeding bullets by
   streaking at precisely their speed and reaching out and picking them up
   like eggs...

   Sandy went about wide-eyed and nervous, an endless ratchet of activity
   that no one quite comprehended at first. The bus was parked out in front
   of the log house and Kesey would be inside the bus doing something and
   Sandy, outside the door, would suddenly begin arguing with him over some
   esoteric point of the sound system. Kesey was keeping the tapes on a hick
   level, he was saying. Kesey was, like, rustling cellophane in front of a
   microphone for "fire," and so forth and so on. So many complaints! Until
   Kesey puts his arms up on the walls of the bus in the Christ on the Cross
   gesture-which is precisely what one of Sandy's brothers used to do when he
   started complaining-and this drives Sandy into a rage and he yells Fuck
   you! and gives Kesey the finger. Kesey streaks out of the door of the bus
   and pins Sandy up against the side of the bus-and it is all over as fast
   as that. Sandy is overwhelmed. He has never seen Kesey use his tremendous
   strength against anyone before, and it is overwhelming, the idea of it
   even. But it is all over in no time. Kesey is suddenly calm again and asks
   Sandy to come with him to the backhouse, the shack by the creek. He wants
   to talk to him.

   So they go out there and Kesey talks to Sandy about Sandy's attitude.
   Sandy is still Dis-mount, still getting off the bus continually, and why?
   You don't understand, says Sandy. You don't understand my dis-mounting.
   It's like climbing a mountain. Would you rather climb the mountain or have
   a helicopter deposit you on the top? The continual climb, the continual
   remounting, makes it a richer experience, and so on. Kesey nods in a
   somewhat abstracted way and says O.K., Sandy ...

   But Sandy feels paranoid . .. what do they really think of him? What are
   they planning? What insidious prank? He can't get it out of his mind that
   they are building up to some prank of enormous proportions, at his
   expense. A Monstrous Prank ... He can't sleep, his brain keeps going at
   the furious speed of the bus on the road, like an eternal trip on speed.

   Then Kesey devised a game called "Power." He took a dart-board and covered
   it with Masonite and put a spinner in the middle and marked off spoke
   lines forming one section for each Prankster. Each person's Prankster name
   was written in his section, Intrepid Traveler for Babbs, Mai Function for
   Hagen, Speed Limit for Cassady, Hassler for Ron Bevirt, Gretchen Fetchin
   for Paula-in truth, her old name and persona were gone entirely and she
   was now a new person known as Gretchen Fetchin or Gretch. Sandy looked and
   in his section it said: "dis-MOUNT," with the heavy accent on Mount, even
   as he had explained it to Kesey in the backhouse. He was overwhelmed with
   relief and gratitude. Kesey knew! Kesey understood! He was back in the
   bus.

   Everybody was to write out some "tasks" on slips of paper and they would
   all be put in a big pile. Then the spinner was spun, and if it landed on
   you, you reached into the pile and pulled out a "task," which you then had
   to do, and the others gave you points according to how well you had done
   the task, on a scale of one to five points, five being the best. A lot of
   the tasks were very pranked-up, like "put on an article of somebody else's
   clothing." There was a scoreboard and everybody moved his counter up the
   scoreboard as he picked up points. Everybody made his own counter. Sandy
   was making his out of Sculpt Metal. He stretched it to a long spidery
   length, then suddenly compressed it into an ugly wad, because that was the
   way he was beginning to feel. So Page picked it up and made a nice little
   form out of it, like a bridge, and everybody said that's the way it should
   be done-and Sandy feels the paranoia coming back ...

   The prize for winning was: Power. Thirty minutes of absolute power in
   which your word was law and everyone had to do whatever you wanted. Very
   allegorical, this game. By and by Babbs won a game and he ordered
   everybody to bring everything they possessed into the living room.
   Everybody went forth and hauled in all their stuff, out to the bedrooms,
   tents, Kampers, sleeping bags, the bus, and brought in a ragamuffin
   mountain of clothes, shoes, boots, toys, paint pots, toothbrushes, books,
   boxes, capsules, stashes, letters, litter, junk. It was all piled up in
   the center of the room, a marvelous Rat mountain of junk. "Now," said
   Babbs, "we redistribute the wealth." And he would hold up some piece of it
   and say, "Who wants one 1964 Gretchen Fetchin toothbrush?" and somebody
   would hold up his hand and it would go to him and somebody else would
   catalogue it all solemnly on a legal pad.

   Then the pointer hits Sandy and he picks up a task, a slip of paper. It is
   in Gretch's handwriting, and it says: "Go out and build a fire." He reads
   it out loud and just keeps staring at it. Then they all stare at him,
   waiting for him to get up and go out and build a fire, and he feels them
   staring and then he knows-it is a very clever plot to get him out of the
   house, get him outside in the dark, and then pull the Monstrous Prank-

   And he starts blurting it all out. / can't do it. Can't you see how it is?
   It's getting awful-/ can't sleep and everything is like this:

   He lays the fingers of one hand over the fingers of the other, forming a
   trellis pattern, and peers through the spaces in between to show how
   everything keeps breaking up, fragmenting, his whole field of vision, ever
   since the DMT trip at Millbrook, and the sea of flames and the paranoia,
   the everlasting paranoia, he blurts it all out, everything that is hanging
   him up and rocketing him toward-what?

   And suddenly it is very quiet in the log house. Every Prankster eye is
   upon him, absorbed, giving him total... Attention, He has come all the way
   out front. The furious motion stops, and he suddenly feels :::: peace.

   "How many points do we give him?" says Kesey.

   And around the circle everyone says "Five!" "Five!" "Five!" "Five!"
   "Five!"-

   "Three," says Gretch, who had written the task in the first place-and
   Sandy-a small microgram of paranoia creeps back in like a mite...

   THE PRANKSTERS NOW REALIZED THAT SANDY WAS IN A BAD way. Kesey had a
   saying, "Feed the hungry bee." So the Pranksters set about showering . . .
   Attention on Sandy, to try to give him a feeling of being at the cool
   center of the whole thing. But he kept misinterpreting their gestures. Why
   are they staring? His insomnia became more and more severe. One night he
   walked down the road to the housing development, Redwood Terrace, to try
   to borrow some Sominex. He was just going to walk up to a door in the
   middle of the night and knock and ask for some Sominex. Somehow he had the
   old New York apartment-house idea that you walk down the hall and borrow a
   cup of sugar, even if you don't know the people. So he starts knocking on
   doors and asking for Sominex. Of course, they all either panic and shut
   the door or tell him to fuck off. The people of Redwood Terrace were a
   little paranoid themselves by this time about the crazies down the road at
   Kesey's.

   By day it was no better. As his insomnia got worse, he started having more
   fragmented vision and finally ... he looks at the wild-painted bus and the
   lurid chaos of the swirls changes into ... the tunnel ! A tunnel they had
   gone through, a long tunnel, in which he had been possessed by intense
   claustrophobia and the paranoid certainty that they would never emerge
   from the tunnel, and now the tunnel appears on the side of the bus in
   horrifying detail. He turns away ... there is the cool limelit bower,
   cathedral in the redwoods, serenity... he turns back to the bus slowly
   :::::::: It is still there! The tunnel! ::::: The bus! ::::: Now painted
   as if by a master, a very Titian :::: An Hieronymus Bosch :::: A Matthias
   Gru:newald :::: With the most HORRIFYING SCENES OF MY LIFE.

   SALVATION? KESEY ANNOUNCES THEY ARE GETTING BACK ON the bus-moving
   again-and going up to Esalen Institute up in Big Sur, four hours drive to
   the south. Esalen was an "experiment in living," as they say, a sort of
   Roughin-it resort perched on a cliff about 1,000 feet above the Pacific. A
   very dramatic piece of Nature, in the nineteenth-century seascape fashion.
   Waves crashing way down below and sparkling air way up here and a view of
   half the world, mountains, ocean, sky, the whole show, in a word, for
   which Big Sur is famous. There was a lodge and a swimming pool and a
   stretch of greensward out to the edge of the cliff and some hot sulphur
   springs about 100 yards away, also perched on the side of a cliff, in
   which one could bathe and gaze out over the eternal ocean. Behind the
   lodge were rows of tiny cabins and a few trailers. These were for the
   clientele. The clients-well, to put it simply, Esalen was a place where
   educated middle-class adults came in the summer to try to get out of The
   Rut and wiggle their fannies a bit.

   The main theoretician at Esalen was a Gestalt psychologist named Fritz
   Perls. Perls was a great goateed man in his seventies who went about in a
   jump suit made of blue terrycloth. He had the air of a very learned,
   dignified, and authoritative blue bear. Perls was the father of the Now
   Trip. His theory was that most people live fantasy lives. They live
   totally in the past or in terms of what they expect in the future, which
   amounts to fear, generally. Perls tried to teach his patients, pupils, and
   the clients at Esalen to live Now for a change, in the present, to become
   aware of their bodies and all the information their senses brought them,
   to shelve their fears and seize the moment. They went through "marathon
   encounters," in which a group stayed together for days and brought
   everything out front, no longer hiding behind custom, saying what they
   really felt-shouts, accusations, embraces, tears-a perfect delight, of
   course: "You want to know what I really think of you ..." One of the
   exercises at Esalen was the Now Trip exercise, in which you try to
   catalogue the information your senses are bringing you in the present
   moment. You make a rapid series of statements beginning with the word
   "Now": "Now I feel the wind cooling the perspiration on my forehead ...
   Now I hear a bus coming up the drive in low gear ... Now I hear a Beatles
   record playing over a loudspeaker ..."

   A bus? A Beatles record? The Pranksters are here, Now Trippers. Kesey had
   been invited to Esalen to conduct a seminar entitled "A Trip with Ken
   Kesey." Nobody had quite counted on the entire fully wired and wailing
   Prankster ensemble, however. The clientele at Esalen had come a long way
   in a few weeks and many were beginning to peek over the edge of The Rut.
   And what they saw ... it could be scary out there in Freedomland. The
   Pranksters were friendly, but they glowed in the dark. They pranked about
   like maniacs in the serene Hot Springs. Precious few signed up for a trip
   with Ken Kesey, even in seminar form. Sandy, meanwhile, was swinging
   wildly from feelings of paranoia to feelings of godly . . . Power. And the
   trip was always the bus. One moment it was covered with the Hieronymus
   Bosch scenes of his most private Hell. The next-he controls the bus. One
   night he discovers he can unpaint the bus just by staring at it. He has
   psychokinetic powers. His stare bears the power of life or death. The
   waves crash below the Esalen cliff-and he stares at the bus and...
   unpaints it. He strips one whole side down to its original sunny
   school-bus yellow. The whole Prankster overlay is gone. A trick of the
   mind? He looks away, out over the Pacific and at the stars-then swings
   back suddenly toward the bus ::::: It is still unpainted :::: still virgin
   school-bus yellow.

   He has the power-but can it ward off the Monstrous Prank ? The Pranksters
   take the bus into Monterey to see a movie, The Night of the Iguana. He
   sits in the back of the bus, so he can watch them. If any of them tries
   anything, with one stare he can ... They go into the theater and he lags
   behind, then sits several rows behind them. To keep an eye out... There is
   a Tom and Jerry cartoon on the screen. The mouse, Jerry, tricks the cat,
   Tom, and the cat goes off a cliff and hits, flattened in an explosion of
   eyeballs, thousands of eyeballs. Everyone is laughing, but to Sandy it is
   sickening, incredibly brutal. He jumps up and runs out of the theater and
   wanders around Monterey for an hour and a half or so. Then he wanders back
   to the theater, and Hagen is standing outside.

   "Where the hell have you been? Kesey is looking all over for you.

   Sandy runs back into the theater. Kesey! He looks up on the screen-and the
   mouse, Jerry, tricks the cat, Tom, and the cat goes off a cliff and hits,
   flattened in an explosion of eyeballs, thousands of eyeballs... Sandy
   flees again. Kesey is now waiting outside. He coaxes Sandy on to the bus
   and they head back to Esalen.

   Back in Esalen, in his cabin, Sandy falls half asleep into ... dream wars!
   It is his Power vs. Kesey's, like Dr. Strange vs. Aggamon, and one of them
   will kill the other in the Dream War ... He exerts the utmost psychic
   energy ... opens his eyes and makes out a machine in the cabin-a heater?
   It looks like a heater but it is Kesey's death instrument, and in that
   moment the thermostat turns on the machine and a tiny red light comes
   on--Kesey's ray gun-has triumphed, filled him, and Sandy falls off the
   bed, dead, lying on the floor, and he leaves his body in astral projection
   and sails out over the Pacific, out from the Esalen cliff, out for 40 or
   50 miles, soaring, and the wind goes in gusts, huhhhh-hhnnnhh,
   huhhhhhhhhhnnnh, huhhhhhhhhhnnnh, and he is the wind, not even a compact
   spirit flying but a totally diffuse being, dissolved in the upper ethers,
   and he can see the whole moonlit ocean and Esalen way back there. Then he
   comes to, and he is on the floor of the cabin, breathing hard,
   huhhhhhhhhnnnh, huhhhh-hhhhhnnh, huhhhhhhhnnnh.

   "San-dy! San-dy! San-dy!"-daylight, and they're outside the cabin, calling
   him, the Pranksters... what Monstrous Prank?-

   In fact, Kesey had instructed the Pranksters to give Sandy total Attention
   to try to bring him around, to put him at the center of everything. Sandy
   comes out, sees them staring but takes it for glowers and aggression . ..
   Nevertheless-on to the bus, and they ride out along Big Sur in the
   sunlight. Kesey and the Pranksters have prepared a long Sandy document,
   twelve pages of text and drawings, very fanciful, like a psychic brief,
   bringing all of Sandy's fears out front and dispelling them in
   camaraderie-and it begins to work. Then as they roll along the cliff
   highway Kesey takes Sandy up on top of the bus for a Now Trip. They sit up
   there in the sun with the wind streaming by and Kesey is grooving off the
   designs on the hood of the bus: "Now I see the green snake form going into
   the red and the edge of it melts into ..." and so forth, and Sandy grooves
   off Kesey's Now Trip-Kesey!-Total Attention!-and it is like he is coming
   around at last, he feels on the bus again. And then he decides to take
   Kesey on a Now Trip, sailing along the cliff highway. "Now," says Sandy,
   "I see the ocean like a sheet of ice slanting in toward the shore . .. Now
   I see three suns..."-in truth! the vibration of the bus has thrown him
   into the DMT reaction. He gets a triple image from the vibration and
   shaking of the bus, but instead of refocusing on one sun, he keeps seeing
   three. Kesey looks up at the sky, and says, "Yeah, yeah," grooving with
   it, which makes Sandy feel very good . . .

   But then nighttime. "San-dy! San-dy!" They're trying to coax him out of
   the cabin again. For-what? Why, the Monstrous Prank, naturally, but... he
   has Power. Outside-they have candles, the Pranksters do, and they're
   beginning a candlelight march down a path in a ravine that cuts down
   through the cliff, all the way to the water's edge. For-what? Why, the
   Monst-But then Kesey's wife, Faye, comes up very silent and smiling and
   loving and gives him a candle and lights it, and Faye is like complete
   honesty and love, so he starts off, following them down the path, holding
   candles, while the surf booms up the ravine from below. Why do they want
   him to join this spooky procession? Why, for the most Monstrous Prank of
   all-to kill him at the water's edge, but he has the power-the candle dims
   in the wind, and then comes back up, burning full-but it is not the wind,
   it is Sandy-he can make it shrink and dim down just by staring at it,
   psychokinesis, then draw it back up, all with his mind, he can control the
   flame utterly, and it can control him, for they are one and the same, God,
   and he trudges down the ravine, becoming more and more powerful-but a girl
   named Lola has stopped ahead of him. He draws closer and she has a candle
   and is tilting it so that the wax drips on her fingers and she is grooving
   over the wax dripping over her fingers and grinning, and her hand, in wax,
   turns white and dead, a skeleton, and her grin, lit from beneath by the
   candle, turns waxy and zombie - the death starts here - and Sandy bolts,
   charging back up the ravine-

   -not knowing that the whole procession had been set up as a ceremony of
   love, a love trip, for him, to bring him around, a candlelit celebration
   of Sandy down by the water-

   -but he is long gone, running down the cliff highway now, toward Monterey,
   running until his lungs give out, then walking, then running up to the
   lights in the houses on the cliffs over the water, Big Sur summer places,
   and knocking on the door, screaming incoherently about jumping off the
   cliffs; until the police come. Gotcha! Which is a joke, because he can
   annihilate them any moment he chooses, with a psychokinetic ray-

   They put him in the back seat, streaking down Route 1 toward Monterey,
   wheeling around the curves, faster and faster-

   "Don't go so fast!" Sandy says.

   "What?"

   "Don't go so fast!"

   "Listen," the cop says. "I'll slow down if you stop staring at the back of
   my head."

   "Ahhhhhh."

   "Look out the window or something. Look at the scenery. Stop staring at
   the back of my head."

   So he takes his eyes out of the back of the cop's skull. Two fever hole
   depressions. Another moment-

   THE MONTEREY POLICE HELD HIM IN THE JAIL IN MONTEREY until his brother
   Chris could get there from New York. Chris ran into Kesey at the jail.
   We've got to get him out of here, said Kesey. What do you mean? We've got
   to get him back where he belongs, with the Pranksters. Chris took Sandy
   back to New York for treatment. It was a long time before Chris knew what
   in the hell Kesey had been talking about.

                                    chapter

                                       XI

                               The Unspoken Thing

   HOW TO TELL IT! . . . THE CURRENT FANTASY ... I NEVER heard any of the
   Pranksters use the word religious to describe the mental atmosphere they
   shared after the bus trip and the strange days in Big Sur. In fact, they
   avoided putting it into words. And yet-

   They got on the bus and headed back to La Honda in the old Big Sur
   summertime, all frozen sunshine up here, and no one had to say it: they
   were all deep into some weird shit now, as they would just as soon call it
   by way of taking the curse . . . off the Unspoken Thing. Things were
   getting very psychic. It was like when Sandy drove 191 miles in South
   Dakota and then he had looked up at the map on the ceiling of the bus and
   precisely those 191 miles were marked in red ... Sandy : : : : : back in
   Brain Scan country the White Smocks would never in a million years
   comprehend where he had actually been ... which was where they all were
   now, also known as Edge City ... Back in Kesey's log house in La Honda,
   all sitting around in the evening in the main room, it's getting cool
   outside, and Page Browning: I think I'll close the window-and in that very
   moment another Prankster gets up and closes it for him and smi-i-i-i-les
   and says nothing . .. The Unspoken Thing-and these things keep happening
   over and over. They take a trip up into the High Sierras and Cassady pulls
   the bus off the main road and starts driving up a little mountain road-see
   where she goes. The road is so old and deserted the pavement is half
   broken up and they keep climbing and twisting up into nowhere, but the air
   is nice, and up at the top of the grade the bus begins bucking and gulping
   and won't pull any more. It just stops. It turns out they're out of gas,
   which is a nice situation because it's nightfall and they're stranded
   totally hell west of nowhere with not a gas station within thirty, maybe
   fifty miles. Nothing to do but stroke themselves out on the bus and go to
   sleep ... hmmmmmm ... scorpions with boots on red TWA Royal Ambassador
   slumber slippers on his big Stinger Howard Hughes in a sleeping bag on the
   floor in a marble penthouse in the desert

   Dawn

   All wake up to a considerable fetching and hauling and grinding up the
   grade below them and over the crest comes a

   Chevron

   gasoline tanker, a huge monster of a tanker. Which just stops like they
   all met somewhere before and gives them a tankful of gas and without a
   word heads on into the Sierras toward absolutely

   Nothing

   Babbs-Cosmic control, eh Hassler!

   And Kesey-Where does it go? I don't think man has ever been there. We're
   under cosmic control and have been for a long long time, and each time it
   builds, it's bigger, and it's stronger. And then you find out... about
   Cosmo, and you discover that he's running the show. ..

   The Unspoken Thing; Kesey's role and the whole direction the Pranksters
   were taking-all the Pranksters were conscious of it, but none of them put
   it into words, as I say. They made a point of not putting it into words.
   That in itself was one of the unspoken rules. If you label it this, then
   it can't be that... Kesey took great pains not to make his role explicit.
   He wasn't the authority, somebody else was: "Babbs says..." "Page says..."
   He wasn't the leader, he was the "non-navigator." He was also the
   non-teacher. "Do you realize that you're a teacher here?" Kesey says, "Too
   much, too much," and walks away... Kesey's explicit teachings were all
   cryptic, metaphorical; parables, aphorisms: "You're either on the bus or
   off the bus." "Feed the hungry bee," "Nothing lasts," "See with your ears
   and hear with your eyes," "Put your good where it will do the most," "What
   did the mirror say? It's done with people." To that extent it was like Zen
   Buddhism, with the inscrutable koans, in which the novice says, "What is
   the secret of Zen?" and Hui-neng the master says, "What did your face look
   like before your parents begat you?" To put it into so many words, to
   define it, was to limit it. If it's this, then it can't be that... Yet
   there it was! Everyone had his own thing he was working out, but it all
   fit into the group thing, which was-"the Unspoken Thing," said Page
   Browning, and that was as far as anyone wanted to go with words.

   For that matter, there was no theology to it, no philosophy, at least not
   in the sense of an ism. There was no goal of an improved moral order in
   the world or an improved social order, nothing about salvation and
   certainly nothing about immortality or the life hereafter. Hereafter! That
   was a laugh. If there was ever a group devoted totally to the here and now
   it was the Pranksters. I remember puzzling over this. There was something
   so... religious in the air, in the very atmosphere of the Prankster life,
   and yet one couldn't put one's finger on it. On the face of it there was
   just a group of people who had shared an unusual psychological state, the
   LSD experience-

   But exactly! The experience-that was the word! and it began to fall into
   place. In fact, none of the great founded religions, Christianity,
   Buddhism, Islam, Jainism, Judaism, Zoroastrian-ism, Hinduism, none of them
   began with a philosophical framework or even a main idea. They all began
   with an overwhelming new experience, what Joachim Wach called "the
   experience of the holy," and Max Weber, "possession of the deity," the
   sense of being a vessel of the divine, of the All-one. I remember I never
   truly understood what they were talking about when I first read of such
   things. I just took their weighty German word for it. Jesus, Mani,
   Zoroaster, Gautama Buddha-at the very outset the leader did not offer his
   circle of followers a better state hereafter or an improved social order
   or any reward other than a certain "psychological state in the here and
   now," as Weber put it. I suppose what I never really comprehended was that
   he was talking about an actual mental experience they all went through, an
   ecstasy, in short. In most cases, according to scriptures and legend, it
   happened in a flash. Mohammed fasting and meditating on a mountainside
   near Mecca and--flash!-ecstasy, vast revelation and the beginning of
   Islam. Zoroaster hauling haoma water along the road and--flash!-he runs
   into the flaming form of the Archangel Vohu Mano, messenger of Ahura
   Mazda, and the beginning of Zoroastrianism. Saul of Tarsus walking along
   the road to Damascus and-flash!-he hears the voice of the Lord and becomes
   a Christian. Plus God knows how many lesser figures in the 2,000 years
   since then, Christian Rosenkreuz and his "God-illuminated" brotherhood of
   Rosicrucians, Emanuel Swedenborg whose mind suddenly "opened" in 1743,
   Meister Eck-hart and his disciples Suso and Tauler, and in the
   twentieth-century Sadhu Sundar Singh-with-flash!-a vision at the age of 16
   and many times thereafter; ".. . often when I come out of ecstasy I think
   the whole world must be blind not to see what I see, everything is so near
   and clear ... there is no language which will express the things which I
   see and hear in the spiritual world ..." Sounds like an acid head, of
   course. What they all saw in... a flash was the solution to the basic
   predicament of being human, the personal I, Me, trapped, mortal and
   helpless, in a vast impersonal It, the world around me.
   Suddenly!-All-in-one!-flowing together, I into It, and It into Me, and in
   that flow I perceive a power, so near and so clear, that the whole world
   is blind to. All the modern religions, and the occult mysteries, for that
   matter, talk about an Other World-whether Brahma's or the flying
   saucers'-that the rational work-a-day world is blind to. The-so called!
   friends-rational world. If only they, Mom&Dad&Buddy&Sis, dear-but-square
   ones, could but know the pairos, the supreme moment... The historic
   visions have been explained in many ways, as the result of epilepsy,
   self-hypnosis, changes in metabolism due to fasting, or actual
   intervention by gods-or drugs: Zoroastrianism began in a grand bath of
   haoma water, which was the same as the Hindu soma, and was unquestionably
   a drug. The experience!

   And following the experience-after I got to know the Pranksters, I went
   back and read Joachim Wach's paradigm of the way religions are founded,
   written in 1944, and it was almost like a piece of occult precognition for
   me if I played it off against what I knew about the Pranksters:

   Following a profound new experience, providing a new illumination of the
   world, the founder, a highly charismatic person, begins enlisting
   disciples. These followers become an informally but closely knit
   association, bound together by the new experience, whose nature the
   founder has revealed and interpreted. The association might be called a
   circle, indicating that it is oriented toward a central figure with whom
   each of the followers is in intimate contact. The followers may be
   regarded as the founder's companions, bound to him by personal devotion,
   friendship and loyalty. A growing sense of solidarity both binds the
   members together and differentiates them from any other form of social
   organization. Membership in the circle requires a complete break with the
   ordinary pursuits of life and a radical change in social relationships.
   Ties of family and kinship and loyalties of various kinds were at least
   temporarily relaxed or severed. The hardships, suffering and persecution
   that loomed for those who cast their lot with the group were
   counterbalanced by their high hopes and firm expectations ... and so on.
   And of the founder himself: he has "visions, dreams, trances, frequent
   ecstasies" ... "unusual sensitiveness and an intense emotional life" ...
   "is ready to interpret manifestations of the divine" . . . "there is
   something elemental about [him], an uncompromising attitude and an archaic
   manner and language" . . . "He appears as a renewer of lost contracts with
   the hidden powers of life" .. . "does not usually come from the
   aristocracy, the learned or refined; frequently he emerges from simpler
   folk and remains true to his origin even in a changed environment" ...
   "speaks cryptically, with words, signs, gestures, many metaphors, symbolic
   acts of a diverse nature" . .. "illuminates and interprets the past and
   anticipates the future in terms of the kairos (the supreme moment)"-

   The kairos!-the experience!

   -in one of two ways, according to Max Weber: as an "ethical" prophet, like
   Jesus or Moses, who outlines rules of conduct for his followers and
   describes God as a super-person who passes judgment on how they live up to
   the rules. Or as an "exemplary" prophet, like Buddha: for him, God is
   impersonal, a force, an energy, a unifying flow, an All-in-one. The
   exemplary prophet does not present rules of conduct. He presents his own
   life as an example for his followers . . .

   In all these religious circles, the groups became tighter and tighter by
   developing their own symbols, terminology, life styles, and, gradually,
   simple cultic practices, rites, often involving music and art, all of
   which grew out of the new experience and seemed weird or incomprehensible
   to those who have never had it. At that point they would also ... "develop
   a strong urge to extend the message to all people."

   ... all people ... Within the religious circle, status was always a simple
   matter. The world was simply and sheerly divided into "the aware," those
   who had had the experience of being vessels of the divine, and a great
   mass of "the unaware," "the unmusical," the unattuned." Or: you're either
   on the bus or off the bus. Consciously, the Aware were never snobbish
   toward the Unaware, but in fact most of that great jellyfish blob of
   straight souls looked like hopeless cases-and the music of your flute from
   up top the bus just brought them up tighter. But these groups treated
   anyone who showed possibilities, who was a potential brother, with
   generous solicitude ...

   . . . THE POTENTIALLY ATTUNED . . . BEAUTIFUL PEOPLE started showing up at
   Kesey's in La Honda, and no one was turned away. They could stay there,
   live there, if they ...seemed attuned. Mountain Girl was waiting out front
   of Kesey's house when the bus came around the last bend on Route 84 and
   into the redwood gorge. Mountain Girl was a big brunette with a black
   motorcycle, wearing a T-shirt and dungarees. She was only 18 but big,
   about five-foot-nine, and heavy; and loud and sloppy, as far as that went.
   But it was funny ... she had beautiful teeth and a smile that lit up one's
   gizzard ... Her name was Carolyn Adams, but she became Mountain Girl right
   away. As far as I know, nobody ever called her anything else after that,
   until the police got technical about it nine months later with her and
   eleven other Pranksters...

   Cassady had turned Mountain Girl on to Kesey's place. She had been working
   as a technician in a biological laboratory in Palo Alto. She had a
   boyfriend who-well, he probably thought of himself as a "beatnik" in his
   square hip way. Only he never did anything, this boyfriend of hers. They
   never went anywhere. They never went out. So she went out by herself. She
   ended up one night in St. Michael's Alley, one of Palo Alto's little boho
   rookeries, at a birthday party for Cassady. Cassady said over the mountain
   and down under the redwoods was where it was at.

   Mountain Girl was a big hit with the Pranksters from the very start. She
   seemed always completely out front, without the slightest prompting. She
   was one big loud charge of vitality. Here comes Mountain Girl-and it was a
   thing that made you pick up, as soon as you saw her mouth broaden into a
   grin and her big brown eyes open, open, open, open until they practically
   exploded like sunspots in front of your eyes and you knew that wonderful
   countryfied voice was going to sing out something like:

   "Hey! Guess what we're gonna do! We were just up to Baw's"-the general
   store-"and we're gonna git some seeds and plant some grass in Baw's window
   box! Can't you see it! The whole town's gonna git turned on in six
   months!"-and so on.

   But underneath all the gits and gonnas, she turned out to be probably the
   brightest girl around there, with the possible exception of Faye. Faye
   said very little, so it was a moot point. Mountain Girl turned out to be
   from a highly respectable upper-middle-class background in Poughkeepsie,
   N.Y., a family of Unitarians. In any case, she caught on to everything
   right away. She was decisive and had all the nerve in the world. Also she
   was getting more beautiful every day. All it took was a few weeks of the
   rice and stew and irregular eating around Kesey's, the old involuntary
   macrobiotic diet, so to speak, and she started thinning out and getting
   beautiful. None of this was lost on Kesey. He was the Mountain Man and she
   was the Mountain Girl. She was just right for him ...

   Mountain Girl moved into a tent up on a little plateau on the hill behind
   the house, under the redwoods. Page Browning had a tent up there, too. So
   did Babbs and Gretch. Mike Hagen had his Screw Shack. The Screw Shack was
   a very stellar-Mal Function!-Hagen production. None of the boards lay true
   and none of the nails ever quite made it all the way in. The boards seemed
   to be huddled together in a tentative agreement. One day Kesey took a
   hammer and hit a single nail on the peak of the shack and the whole shack
   fell down.

   "Nothing lasts, Hagen!" yelled Mountain Girl, and her laugh boomed through
   the redwoods.

   And the Hermit's Cave... One day Faye looked out the kitchen window and
   there was a little creature at the foot of the hill behind the house,
   peering out from the edge of the woods like a starved animal. He was a
   small, thin kid, barely five feet tall, but he had a huge black beard,
   like some Ozark g-nome in Barney Google. He just stood there with these
   big starveling eyes bugging out of his wild black shag, looking at the
   house. Faye brought him out a plate of tuna fish. He took it without
   saying anything and ate it; and never left. The Hermit!

   The Hermit hardly ever said anything, but he turned out to be perfectly
   literate, and he would talk to people he trusted, like Kesey. He was only
   18. He had lived with his mother somewhere around La Honda. He had had a
   lot of trouble in school. He had had a lot of trouble everywhere. He was
   the Oddball. Finally he took off for the woods and lived up there
   barefoot, just wearing a shirt and Levi's, killing animals and spearing
   fish for food. People caught glimpses of him now and again and high-school
   kids used to try to hunt him down and demolish his lean-tos and otherwise
   torment him. His wandering had brought him up to the woods up behind
   Kesey's house, a wild stretch that had been designated "Sam McDonald Park"
   but never cleared.

   The Hermit built himself a Hermit's Cave down in a pit in a dark green
   moldy mossy gully that dropped off the path up into the woods. He filled
   it with objects that winked and blinked and cooed. He was also keeper of
   the communal acid stash down there in the cave. And he had other secrets,
   such as his diaries... the Hermit Memoirs, in which real life and his
   Hermit fantasy ran together in wriggling rivers of little boys and lost
   hunters whom only the Hermit could rescue ... Nobody ever knew his real
   name at all until a few months later when, as I say, the police would get
   technical about it...

   Then Babbs discovered Day-Glo, Day-Glo paint, and started painting it up
   the very trunks of the redwoods, great zappers of green, orange, yellow.
   Hell, he even painted the leaves, and Kesey's place began to glow at
   night. And resound. More and more people were showing up for long or short
   stays. Cassady brought in a Scandinavian-style blonde who was always
   talking about hangups. Everybody had hangups. She became June the Goon.
   Then a girl who wore huge floppy red hats and granny glasses, the first
   anybody had ever seen. She became Marge the Barge. Then a sculptor named
   Ron Boise, a thin guy from New England with a nasal accent like Titus
   Moody, only a Titus Moody who spoke the language of Hip: "Man, like, I
   mean, you know," and so on. Boise brought in a sculpture of a hanged man,
   so they ran it up a tree limb with a hangman's noose. He also built a
   great Thunderbird, a great Thor-and-Wotan beaked monster with an amber
   dome on its back and you could get inside of it. Inside were some mighty
   wire strings, which you could pull, which they did, and the Thunderbird
   twanged out across the gorge like the mightiest vibrating bass beast in
   the history of the world. Then he brought in a Kama Sutra sculpture, a
   huge sheetmetal man with his face in the sheetmetal groin of a big
   sheetmetal babe. She had her left leg sticking up in the air. It was
   hollow and Babbs ran a hose up it and turned the water on and it spurted
   out, so they left it running, eternally spurting. It looked like she was
   having an eternal orgasm out of her left foot.

   And ... Sssss-ssss-ssss-Bradley. Bradley, Bradley Hodgeman, had been a
   college tennis star. He was short but very muscular. He turned up-or came
   on, Bradley was always coming on-acting so weird, people would stand there
   and look at him, even at Kesey's. He talked in clots of words, "Fell down
   by the wino station-insoluble flying objects, nitrate-creasey greens by
   the back porch-Ray Bradbury interlining of the lone chrome nostril, you
   understand"-sidling through the room with a nonspecific grin on and his
   hair combed down over his face like a surfer, his back hunched over, and
   then going into a stopped-up laugh, Sssss-ssss-ssss-ssss-until somebody
   would try to break up his sequence by asking him how was the tennis
   playing going these days and he would widen his grin and open his eyes to
   a horizon of vast significance and say, "One day I hit the ball up in the
   air ... and it never came down ... Sssss-ssss--ssss--ssss..."

   ACTUALLY, THERE WERE A LOT OF KIDS IN THE EARLY 1960S who were ... yes;
   attuned. I used to think of them as the Beautiful People because of the
   Beautiful People letters they used to write their parents. They were
   chiefly in Los Angeles, San Francisco, and New York City, these kids. They
   had a regular circuit they were on, and there was a lot of traffic from
   city to city. Most of them were from middle-class backgrounds, but not
   upper bourgeois, more petit bourgeois, if that old garbanzo can stand
   being written down again-homes with Culture but no money or money but no
   Culture. At least that was the way it struck me, judging by the Beautiful
   People I knew. Culture, Truth, and Beauty were important to them . .. "Art
   is a creed, not a craft," as somebody said ... Young! Immune! Christ,
   somehow there was enough money floating around in the air so that one
   could do this thing, live together with other kids-Our own thing!-from our
   own status sphere, without having to work at a job, and live on our own
   terms-Us! and people our age!-it was... beautiful, it was a... whole
   feeling, and the straight world never understood it, this thing of one's
   status sphere and how one was only nineteen, twenty, twenty-one,
   twenty-two or so and not starting out helpless at the bottom of the
   ladder, at all, because the hell with the ladder itself-one was already up
   on a ... level that the straight world was freaking baffled by! Straight
   people were always trying to figure out what is wrong here-never having
   had this feeling themselves. Straight people called them beatniks. I
   suppose the Beautiful People identified with the Beat Generation
   excitement of the late 1950s, but in fact there was a whole new motif in
   their particular bohemian status sphere: namely, psychedelic drugs.

   El... Es... Dee ... se-cret-ly ... Timothy Leary, Alpert, and a few
   chemists like Al Hubbard and the incognito "Dr. Spaulding" had been
   pumping LSD out into the hip circuit with a truly messianic conviction.
   LSD, peyote, mescaline, morning-glory seeds were becoming the secret new
   thing in the hip life. A lot of kids who were into it were already piled
   into amputated apartments, as I called them. The seats, the tables, the
   beds-none of them ever had legs. Communal living on the floor, you might
   say, although nobody used terms like "communal living" or "tribes" or any
   of that. They had no particular philosophy, just a little leftover
   Buddhism and Hinduism from the beat period, plus Huxley's theory of
   opening doors in the mind, no distinct life style, except for the Legless
   look ... They were ... well, Beautiful People!-not "students," "clerks,"
   "salesgirls," "executive trainees"-Christ, don't give me your
   occupation-game labels! we are Beautiful People, ascendent from your robot
   junkyard :::::: and at this point they used to sit down and write home the
   Beautiful People letter. Usually the girls wrote these letters to their
   mothers. Mothers all over California, all over America, I guess, got to
   know the Beautiful People letter by heart. It went:

   "Dear Mother,

   "I meant to write to you before this and I hope you haven't been worried.
   I am in [San Francisco, Los Angeles, New York, Arizona, a Hopi Indian
   Reservation!!!! New York, Ajijic, San Miguel de Allende, Mazatlan, Mexico!
   ! ! !] and it is really beautiful here. It is a beautiful scene. We've
   been here a week. I won't bore you with the whole thing, how it happened,
   but I really tried, because I knew you wanted me to, but it just didn't
   work out with [school, college, my job, me and Danny] and so I have come
   here and it a really beautiful scene. I don't want you to worry about me.
   I have met some Beautiful People and ..."

   ... and in the heart of even the most unhip mamma in all the U.S. of A.
   instinctively goes up the adrenal shriek: beatniks, bums, spades-dope.

   at Kesey's the days began - when? there were no clocks around and nobody
   had a watch. The lime light would be sparkling down through the redwoods
   when you woke up. The first sounds, usually, would be Faye calling the
   children-"Jed! Shannon!"-or a cabinet door slamming in the kitchen or a
   pan being put down on the drainboard. Faye the eternal-Then maybe a car
   coming over the wooden bridge and parking in the dirt area out front of
   the house. Sometimes it would be one of the regulars, like Hagen, coming
   back. He was always going off somewhere. Sometimes it would be the
   everlasting visitors, from god knows where, friends of friends of friends,
   curiosity seekers, some of them, dope seekers, some of them, kids from
   Berkeley, you could never tell. People around the house would just start
   to be getting up. Kesey emerges in his undershorts, walks out front to the
   creek and dives in that mothering cold water, by way of shocking himself
   awake. George Walker is sitting on the porch with just a pair of Levi's
   on, going over his muscles, his arms, shoulders and torso and all the
   muscles, with his hands, looking for flaws, picking off hickies, sort of
   like the ministrations of a cat. There would be a great burst of activity
   in the late afternoon, people working on various projects, the most
   complicated of which, endless, it seemed like, was The Movie.

   The Pranksters spent much of the fall of 1964, and the winter, and the
   early spring of 1965, working on ... The Movie. They had about forty-five
   hours of color film from the bus trip, and once they got to going over it,
   it was a monster. Kesey had high hopes for the film, on every level. It
   was the world's first acid film, taken under conditions of total
   spontaneity barreling through the heartlands of America, recording all
   now, in the moment. The current fantasy was... a total breakthrough in
   terms of expression ... but also something that would amaze and delight
   many multitudes, a movie that could be shown commercially as well as in
   the esoteric world of the heads. But The Movie was a monster, as I say.
   The sheer labor and tedium in editing forty-five hours of film was
   unbelievable. And besides... much of the film was out of focus. Hagen,
   like everybody else, had been soaring half the time, and the bouncing of
   the bus hadn't helped especially-but that was the trip! Still... Also,
   there were very few establishing shots, shots showing where the bus was
   when this or that took place. But who needs that old Hollywood thing of
   long shot, medium shot, closeup, and the careful cuts and wipes and pans
   and dolly in and dolly out, the old bullshit. Still... plunging in on
   those miles of bouncing, ricocheting, blazing film with a splicer was like
   entering a jungle where the greeny vines grew faster than you could chop
   them down in front of you.

   The film had already cost a staggering sum, about $70,000, mostly for
   color processing. Kesey had put everything he had gotten from his two
   novels plus the play adaptation of One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest into
   Intrepid Trips, Inc. His brother, Chuck, who had a good creamery business
   in Springfield, Oregon, invested to some extent. George Walker's father
   had set up a trust fund for him, with strings on it, but he contributed
   when he could. By the end of 1965, according to Faye's bookkeeping,
   Intrepid Trips, Inc., had spent $103,000 on the various Prankster
   enterprises. Living expenses for the whole group ran to about $20,000 for
   the year, a low figure considering that there were seldom fewer than ten
   people around to be taken care of and usually two or three vehicles. Food
   and lodging were all taken care of by Kesey.

   A pot of money at the front door-There was a curious little library
   building up on the shelves in the living room, books of science fiction
   and other mysterious things, and you could pick up almost any of these
   books and find truly strange vibrations. The whole thing here is so much
   like... this book on Kesey's shelf, Robert Heinlein's novel, Stranger in a
   Strange Land. It is bewildering. It is as if Heinlein and the Pranksters
   were bound together by some inexplicable acausal connecting bond. This is
   a novel about a Martian who comes to earth, a true Superhero, in fact,
   born of an Earth mother and father after a space flight from Earth to
   Mars, but raised by infinitely superior beings, the Martians. Beings on
   other planets are always infinitely superior in science-fiction novels.
   Anyway, around him gathers a mystic brotherhood, based on a mysterious
   ceremony known as water-sharing. They live in-La Honda! At Kesey's! Their
   place is called the Nest. Their life transcends all the usual earthly
   games of status, sex, and money. No one who once shares water and partakes
   of life in the Nest ever cares about such banal competitions again. There
   is a pot of money inside the front door, provided by the Superhero ...
   Everything is totally out front in the Nest-no secrets, no guilt, no
   jealousies, no putting anyone down for anything: "... a plural marriage-a
   group theogamy ... Therefore whatever took place-or was about to take
   place ... was not public but private. 'Ain't nobody here but us gods'-so
   how could anyone be offended? Bacchanalia, unashamed swapping, communal
   living . .. everything."

   Kesey by now had not only the bus but the very woods wired for sound.
   There were wires running up the hillside into the redwoods and microphones
   up there that could pick up random sounds. Up in the redwoods atop the
   cliff on the other side of the highway from the house were huge speakers,
   theater horns, that could flood the entire gorge with sound. Roland Kirk
   and his half a dozen horns funking away in the old sphenoid saxophone
   sinus cavities of the redwoods.

   Dusk! Huge stripes of Day-Glo green and orange ran up the soaring redwoods
   and gleamed out at dusk as if Nature had said at last, Aw freak it, and
   had freaked out. Up the gully back of the house, up past the Hermit's
   Cave, were Day-Glo face masks and boxes and machines and things that
   glowed, winked, hummed, whistled, bellowed, and microphones that could
   pick up animals, hermits, anything, and broadcast them from the treetops,
   like the crazy gibbering rhesus background noises from the old Jungle Jim
   radio shows. Dusk!  At dusk a man could put on something like a World War
   I aviator's helmet, only painted in screaming Day-Glo, and with his face
   painted in Day-Glo constellations, the bear, the goat, a great walking
   Day-Glo hero in the dusky rusky forests, and he could orate in the deep of
   the forest, up the hill, only in spectral tones, like the Shadow, any old
   message, something like: "This is control tower, this is control tower,
   clear Runway One, the cougar microbes approach, bleeding antique lint from
   every pore and begging for high octane, beware, be aware, all ye who sleep
   in barracks on the main strip, the lumps in your mattress are carnivore
   spores, venereal butterflies sent by the Combine to mothproof your brain,
   a pro-kit in every light socket-Plug up the light sockets! The cougar
   microbes are marching in like army ants.. . "-happy to know that someone,
   somebody, might answer from the house, or some place, 6ver another
   microphone, booming over the La Honda hills: "May day, May day, collapse
   the poles at every joint, hide inside your folding rules, calibrate your
   brains for the head count..." And Bob Dylan raunched and rheumed away in
   the sphenoids or some damned place-

   By nightfall the Pranksters are in the house and a few joints are
   circulating, saliva-liva-liva-liva-liva, and the whole thing is getting
   deeper into the moment, as it were, and people are working on tapes, tapes
   being played back, stopped, rewound, played again, a click on the plastic
   lever, stopped again ... and a little speed making the rounds-such a
   lordly surge under the redwoods!-tablets of Benzedrine and Dexedrine,
   mainly, and you take off for a burst of work and rapping into the night.
   .. experiments of all sorts favored here, like putting contact microphones
   up against the bare belly and listening to the enzymes gurgling. Most
   Prankster bellies go gurgle-galumph-blub and so on, but Cassady's goes
   ping!-dingaping!-ting! as if he were wired at 78 rpm and everyone else is
   at 33 rpm, which seems about right. And then they play a tape against a
   television show. That is, they turn on the picture on the TV, the Ed
   Sullivan Show, say, but they turn off the sound and play a tape of, say,
   Babbs and somebody rapping off each other's words. The picture of the Ed
   Sullivan Show and the words on the tape suddenly force your mind to reach
   for connections between two vastly different orders of experience. On the
   TV screen, Ed Sullivan is holding Ella Fitzgerald's hands with his hands
   sopped over her hands as if her hands were the first robins of spring, and
   his lips are moving, probably saying, "Ella, that was wonderful! Really
   wonderful! Ladies and gentlemen, another hand for a great, great lady!"
   But the voice that comes out is saying to Ella Fitzgerald-in perfect
   synch-"The lumps in your mattress are carnivore spores, venereal
   butterflies sent by the Combine to mothproof your brain, a pro-kit in
   every light socket-Ladies and gentlemen, Plug up the light sockets! Plug
   up the light sockets! The cougar microbes are marching in ... "

   Perfect! The true message!-

   -although this kind of weird synchronization usually struck outsiders as
   mere coincidence or just whimsical, meaningless in any case. They couldn't
   understand why the Pranksters grooved on it so. The inevitable confusion
   of the unattuned-like most of the Pranksters' unique practices, it derived
   from the LSD experience and was incomprehensible without it. Under LSD, if
   it really went right, Ego and Non-Ego started to merge. Countless things
   that seemed separate started to merge, too: a sound became ... a color!
   blue ... colors became smells, walls began to breathe like the underside
   of a leaf, with one's own breath. A curtain became a column of concrete
   and yet it began rippling, this incredible concrete mass rippling in
   harmonic waves like the Puget Sound bridge before the crash and you can
   feel it, the entire harmonics of the universe from the most massive to the
   smallest and most personal-presque vu!-all flowing together in this very
   moment...

   This side of the LSD experience-the feeling!-tied in with Jung's theory of
   synchronicity. Jung tried to explain the meaningful coincidences that
   occur in life and cannot be explained by cause-and-effect reasoning, such
   as ESP phenomena. He put forth the hypothesis that the unconscious
   perceives certain archetypical patterns that elude the conscious mind.
   These patterns, he suggested, are what unite subjective or psychic events
   with objective phenomena, the Ego with the Non-Ego, as in psychosomatic
   medicine or in the microphysical events of modern physics in which the eye
   of the beholder becomes an integral part of the experiment. Countless
   philosophers, prophets, early scientists, not to mention alchemists and
   occultists, had tried to present the same idea in the past, Plotinus,
   Lao-tse, Pico della Mirandola, Agrippa, Kepler, Leibniz. Every phenomenon,
   and every person, is a microcosm of the whole pattern of the universe,
   according to this idea. It is as if each man were an atom in a molecule in
   a fingernail of a giant being. Most men spend their lives trying to
   understand the workings of the molecule they're born into and all they
   know for sure are the cause-and-effect workings of the atoms in it. A few
   brilliant men grasp the structure of the entire fingernail. A few
   geniuses, like Einstein, may even see that they're all part of a finger of
   some !sort-So space equals time, hmmmmmm ... All the while, however, many
   men get an occasional glimpse of another fingernail from another finger
   flashing by or even a whole finger or even the surface of the giant
   being's face and they realize instinctively that this is a part of a
   pattern they're all involved in, although they are totally powerless to
   explain it by cause and effect. And then-some visionary, through some
   accident-

   -accident, Mahavira?-

   -through some quirk of metabolism, through some drug perhaps, has his
   doors of perception opened for an instant and he almost sees-presque
   vu!-the entire being and he knows for the first time that there is a whole
   . . . other pattern here .. . Each moment in his life is only minutely
   related to the cause-and-effect chain within his little molecular world.
   Each moment, if he could only analyze it, reveals the entire pattern of
   the motion of the giant being, and his life is minutely synched in with
   it-

   - And when the Chevron tanker follows the bus into ... nowhere . . . one
   gets a glimpse of the pattern, a new level . . . many levels here . . .

   The Pranksters never talked about synchronicity by name, but they were
   more and more attuned to the principle. Obviously, according to this
   principle, man does not have free will. There is no use in his indulging
   in a lifelong competition to change the structure of the little
   environment he seems to be trapped in. But one could see the larger
   pattern and move with it-Go with the flow!-and accept it and rise above
   one's immediate environment and even alter it by accepting the larger
   pattern and grooving with it-Put your good where it will do the most!

   Gradually the Prankster attitude began to involve the main things
   religious mystics have always felt, things common to Hindus, Buddhists,
   Christians, and for that matter Theosophists and even flying-saucer
   cultists. Namely, the experiencing of an Other World, a higher level of
   reality. And a perception of the cosmic unity of this higher level. And a
   feeling of timelessness, the feeling that what we know as time is only the
   result of a naive faith in causality-the notion that A in the past caused
   B in the present, which will cause C in the future, when actually A, B,
   and C are all part of a pattern that can be truly understood only by
   opening the doors of perception and experiencing it... in this moment .. .
   this supreme moment. . . this kairos-

   For a long time I couldn't understand the one Oriental practice the
   Pranksters liked, the throwing of the I Ching coins. The I Ching is an
   ancient Chinese text. The Book of Changes, it is  called. It contains 64
   oracular readings, all highly metaphorical. You ask the I Ching a question
   and throw three coins three times and come up with a hexagram and a number
   that points to one of the passages. It "answers" your question. .. yes;
   but the I Ching didn't seem very Pranksterlike. I couldn't fit it in with
   the Pranksters' wired-up, American-flag-flying, Day-Glo electro-pastel
   surge down the great American superhighway. Yet-of course! The I  Ching
   was supremely the book of  Now, of the moment. For, as Jung said, the way
   the coins fall is inevitably tied up with the quality of the entire moment
   in which they fall, the entire pattern, and "form a part of it-a part that
   is insignificant to us, yet most meaningful to Chinese minds" ... these
   things

   THAT ONLY LUCKY DOGS AND MERRY PRANKSTERS HEAR-and SO many mysteries of
   the synch from that time on .. . There is another book in the shelf in
   Kesey's living room that everybody seems to look at, a little book called
   The Journey to the East, by Hermann Hesse. Hesse wrote it in 1932 and
   yet... the synch!...  it is a book about.. . exactly ... the Pranksters!
   and the great bus trip of 1964! "It was my destiny to join in a great
   experience," the book began. "Having had the good fortune to belong to the
   League, I was permitted to be a participant in a unique journey." It goes
   on to tell about a weird, circuitous journey across Europe, toward the
   East, that the members of this League took. It began, supposedly, as just
   a journey, to get from here to there, but gradually it took on a profound
   though unclassifiable meaning: "My happiness did indeed arise from the
   same secret as the happiness in dreams; it arose from the freedom to
   experience everything imaginable simultaneously, to exchange outward and
   inward easily, to move Time and Space about like scenes in a theater. And
   as we League brothers traveled throughout the world without motor-cars or
   ships, as we conquered the war-shattered world by our faith and
   transformed it into Paradise, we creatively brought the past, the future
   and the fictitious into the present moment." The present moment! Now! The
   kairos! It was like the man had been on acid himself and was on the bus.

   EVERY FRIDAY NIGHT THEY HELD A BRIEFING. BRIEFING WAS Babbs's term, from
   his military days in Vietnam. Faye fixes some supper of rice and beans and
   meat, kind of a stew, and they all go into the kitchen and dig into the
   pots and put some on a plate and eat. A few joints are circulating around,
   saliva-liva-liva-liva-liva. Then they all go up to one of the tents on the
   plateau, Page's, and they all crowd in there, sitting this way and that
   with their legs pulled up under their chins and they start throwing out
   this and that subject for discussions. Curiously, this is like summer
   camp, on one level, the Honor Council meeting out in the woods after
   supper, everything smelling of charred firewood and canvas damp with dew,
   and crickets and cicadas sounding off and people slapping their ankles
   from mosquitoes and bugs and shit. On the other hand, the smell of
   new-mown grass burning and ... the many levels... aren't particularly
   summer camp. They usually wait for Kesey to start off. He usually starts
   off with something specific, something he's seen, something he's been
   doing . .. and builds up to what he's been thinking.

   He starts talking about the lag systems he is trying to work out with tape
   recorders. Out in the backhouse he has variable lag systems in which a
   microphone broadcasts over a speaker, and in front of the speaker is a
   second microphone. This microphone picks up what you just broadcast, but
   an instant later. If you wear earphones from the second speaker, you can
   play off against the sound of what you've just said, as in an echo. Or you
   can do the things with tapes, running the tape over the sound heads of two
   machines before it's wound on the takeup reel, or you can use three
   microphones and three speakers, four tape recorders and four sound heads,
   and on and on, until you get a total sense of the lag...

   A person has all sorts of lags built into him, Kesey is saying. One, the
   most basic, is the sensory lag, the lag between the time your senses
   receive something and you are able to react. One-thirtieth of a second is
   the time it takes, if you're the most alert person alive, and most people
   are a lot slower than that. Now, Cassady is right up against that 1/30th
   of a second barrier. He is going as fast as a human can go, but even he
   can't overcome it. He is a living example of how close you can come, but
   it can't be done. You can't go any faster than that. You can't through
   sheer speed overcome the lag. We are all of us doomed to spend our lives
   watching a movie of our lives-we are always acting on what has just
   finished happening. It happened at least 1/30th of a second ago. We think
   we're in the present, but we aren't. The present we know is only a movie
   of the past, and we will really never be able to control the present
   through ordinary means. That lag has to be overcome some other way,
   through some kind of total breakthrough. And there are all sorts of other
   lags, besides, that go along with it. There are historical and social
   lags, where people are living by what their ancestors or somebody else
   perceived, and they may be twenty-five or fifty years or centuries behind,
   and nobody can be creative without overcoming all those lags first of all.
   A person can overcome that much through intellect or theory or study of
   history and so forth and get pretty much into the present that way, but
   he's still going to be up against one of the worst lags of all, the
   psychological. Your emotions remain behind because of training, education,
   the way you were brought up, blocks, hangups and stuff like that, and as a
   result your mind wants to go one way but your emotions don't-

   Cassady speaks up: "Blue noses, red eyes, and that's all there is to say
   about that." And, for once, he stops right there.

   But of course!-the whole emotional lag-and Cassady, voluble King Vulcan
   himself, has suddenly put it all into one immediate image, like a Zen poem
   or an early Pound poem-hot little animal red eyes bottled up by cold
   little blue nose hangups-

   Cassady's disciple, Bradley, says: "God is red"-and even he stops right
   there. The sonofabitch is on for once-it is all compacted into those three
   words, even shorter than Cassady's line, like Bradley didn't even have to
   think it out, it just came out, a play on the phrase God is dead, only
   saying, for those of us on to the analogical thing, God is not dead, God
   is red, God is the bottled-up red animal inside all of us, whole,
   all-feeling, complete, out front, only it is made dead by all the lags-

   Kesey giggles slightly and says, "I think maybe we're really synched up
   tonight"-

   Somebody starts talking about some kid they know who has been busted for
   possession, of grass, and the cops said something to him and he said
   something back and the cops started beating on him. Everybody commiserates
   with the poor incarcerated bastard and they comment on the unfortunate
   tendency cops have of beating up on people, and Babbs says,

   "Yeah! Yeah! Right! Right! Right!-but that's in his movie."

   In his movie-right right right-and they all grok over that. Grok-and then
   it's clear, without anybody having to say it. Everybody, everybody
   everywhere, has his own movie going, his own scenario, and everybody is
   acting his movie out like mad, only most people don't know that is what
   they're trapped by, their little script. Everybody looks around inside the
   tent and nobody says it out loud, because nobody has to. Yet everybody
   knows at once ::::: somehow this ties in, synchs, directly with what Kesey
   has just said about the movie screen of our perceptions that closes us out
   from our own reality ::::: and somehow synchs directly, at the same time,
   in this very moment, with the actual, physical movie, The Movie, that they
   have been slaving over, the great morass of a movie, with miles and miles
   of spiraling spliced-over film and hot splices billowing around them like
   so many intertwined, synched, but still chaotic and struggling human
   lives, theirs, the whole fucking world's-in this very moment-Cassady in
   his movie, called Speed Limit, he is both a head whose thing is speed,
   meaning amphetamines, and a unique being whose quest is Speed, faster,
   goddamn it, spiraling, jerking, kicking, fibrillating tight up against the
   V30 of a second movie-screen barrier of our senses, trying to get into...
   Now-

   -Mountain Girl's movie is called Big Girl, and her scenario stars a girl
   who grew up being the big surging powerful girl in genteel surroundings,
   oh, fin de siecle Poughkeepsie, N.Y., oh Vassar scholars, and who didn't
   fit into whatever they had in mind for delicate girls in striped
   seersucker jumpers in faint ratcheting watersprinkler sun jewels on the
   water drops on the green grass Poughkeepsie, a big girl who's got to break
   out and she gets good and loud and brassy to come on stronger in this
   unequal contest-and later in the plot finds out she is bigger in quite
   another way, and bright, and beautiful.. .

   ... One looks around, and one sees the Hermit, huddled up here inside the
   tent, Hermit whom all love but he gets on nerves-why?-and they say Fuck
   off, Hermit, after which they regret it, and his movie is called
   Everybody's Bad Trip. He is everybody's bad trip, he takes it upon
   himself, he takes your bad trip for you, the worst way you thought it
   could happen-

   And Page, with his black jacket with the Iron Cross on it, his movie is
   called-of course!-Zea-lot. It is as if everyone in here, smelling the
   burning grass, suddenly remembers a dream Page told them he had while he
   was sleeping on a cot in a jail in Arizona for, er, turning the citizens
   on to Dimensional Kreemo, yes, well-in this dream a young man named
   Zea-lot came to town, dressed in black, and he inflamed the citizens into
   doing all the secret fiend things they most dreaded letting themselves do,
   like staving in the windows of the Fat Jewelry Co., Inc., and
   sco-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-ping it up, like jumping little high-assed mulatto
   wenches, doing all the forbidden things, led on, encouraged, onward,
   upward, by the burning shiny black horseman, Zealot-after which, in the
   freaking cold blue morning after, they all look at each each-who did
   this?-who did all this dope-taking and looting and shafting?-what in the
   name of God came over us?-what came over this town?-well--shit!-it wasn't
   us, it was him, he infected and inflamed our brains, that damned snake,
   Zea-lot-and they charge down the street alternately beating their breasts
   and their bald heads, yelling for the hide of Zealot, crying out his name
   as the ultimate infamy-while Zea-lot just rides off nonchalantly into the
   black noon, and they just have to watch his black back and the black ass
   of his horse receding over the next hill, taking the crusade on to ....
   turn on ... the next town ...

   . . . yes . . .

   "Yeah, we're really synched up tonight."

   -and, of course, everyone in this tent looks at Kesey and wonders. What is
   his movie? Well, you might call it Randle McMur-phy, for a start.
   McMurphy, goading, coaxing, leading everybody on to give themselves a
   little bigger movie, a little action, moving the plot from out of deadass
   snug harbor. There's a hell of a scene going for you, bub, out here in
   Edge City. But don't even stop there-

   -and all those things are keeping us out of the present, Kesey is saying,
   out of our own world, our own reality, and until we can get into our own
   world, we can't control it. If you ever make that breakthrough, you'll
   know it. It'll be like you had a player piano, and it is playing a mile a
   minute, with all the keys sinking in front of you in fantastic chords, and
   you never heard of the song before, but you are so far into the thing,
   your hands start going along with it exactly. When you make that
   breakthrough, then you'll start controlling the piano-

   --and extend the message to all people-

                                    chapter

                                      XII

                                    The Bust

   Whereas La Honda's Wilde Weste lode

   Seems to be owed to the gunslinging Younger Brothers;

   and

   Whereas They holed up in town

   And dad-blamed but they found a neighborly way

   To pay for their stay; and

   Whereas They built a whole modern store, those notorious mothers;

   But them was the Younger Brothers,

   Mere gunslingers; and

   Whereas Now this Kesey

   And his Merry Humdingers down the road-

   God-damn Wild West ob-scene

   Crazies and dope fiends

   And putrescent beatniks

   Paint the treetrunks phosphorescent; and

   Whereas They beat on tin drums with sticks

   And roots while a tin man

   With a tin tenderloin

   Buries his smile in the tin groin

   Of a tin bitch ejaculating through a bunion; and

   Whereas The crazies go cooing, keening, itchy-gooning

   Ululating and yahooing

   Worse than gunslingers; and

   Whereas We know what the ninnies are doing-

   You are hereby empowered ::::::::::::

   By now the Pranksters had built up so much momentum they begin to feel
   immune even to a very obvious danger, namely, the cops.

   The citizens of La Honda were becoming more and more exercised about Kesey
   and the Pranksters, and so were the San Mateo County sheriff and federal
   narcotics officials. Not knowing what the hell accounted for the crazy
   life at Kesey's place, they apparently assumed there was some hard drug
   use going on-heroin, cocaine, morphine. Late in 1964 they put Kesey's
   place under surveillance. The Pranksters knew about it and used to play
   games with the cops. The main federal narcotics agent in the area was a
   San Francisco Chinese, Agent William Wong. The Pranksters made a huge sign
   and put it up on the house:

                              We're Clean, Willie!

   It was fun, the cop game. The cops would be out in the woods at night,
   along the creek, and one of them would step into the creek and get his
   feet wet and say something. The Pranksters would pick all this up on the
   remote mikes in the woods, whereupon the voice of Mountain Girl,
   broadcasting from inside the cabin, would jeer out over an amplifier up in
   the redwoods: "Hey! Why don't you come in the house and dry off your feet,
   you cops! Quit playing the cop game and come in and git some nice hot
   coffee!"

   The cops were just playing their eternal cop game. That's all it seemed
   like to the Pranksters.

   About April 21, 1965, the Pranksters got a tip that a warrant had been
   drawn up and the cops were going to raid. Delightful! The cops were really
   going to play their game right up to their BB gun eyeballs. The Pranksters
   put up a great sign at the front gate

                 No Admittance. Five-Day Countdown in Progress

   as if they were embarked upon the damnedest, most awfulest dope orgy brain
   blowout in the history of the world. In fact, they set about making the
   premises clean. On the third day of the countdown, April 23, 1965, 10:50
   p.m., the raid came. Oh God, there was never a better game played by any
   cops. Here they were, the absolute perfect cop-game cops, the sheriff,
   seventeen deputies, Federal Agent Wong, eight police dogs, cars, wagons,
   guns, posses, ropes, walkie-talkies, bullhorns-Cosmo! the whole freaking
   raid scene-and right up to the end the Pranksters played it as they saw
   it: namely, as a high farce, an opera bouffe. The cops claimed they caught
   Kesey trying to flush a batch of marijuana down the toilet. Kesey claimed
   he was only in there painting flowers on the toilet bowl. The bathroom was
   already a madhouse collage of photos, clippings, murals, mandalas, every
   weird thing in the world, like an indoor version of the bus, and the cops
   crashed in and Agent Wong grabbed Kesey from behind. Kesey was later
   booked on a charge of resisting arrest, among other charges, to which he
   said that he had been in the bathroom and some unidentified male came up
   and embraced him from behind, and so naturally he slugged him. It was a
   laugh and a half. Kesey's resistance, he said, upended Wong and hurtled
   him into the bathtub on top of Page Browning, who was taking a bath.
   Browning was arrested for resisting arrest, too. It was too much.

   Even after the raiders had everybody in there, thirteen people, lined up
   against the walls, and were searching them for drugs, it was just the most
   wacked-out cop game anybody had ever seen any cops play. One of the
   raiders reached into Mike Hagen's pocket, and when he drew his hand out,
   it held a vial of some clear liquid, whereupon all the Pranksters started
   shouting: "Hey! Play fair! Play fair! Be fair cops! Play hard but play
   fair"-and so on. The vial, whatever it was or was supposed to be, was
   never heard of again. In a tool box outside, the raiders found a
   hypodermic syringe full of some kind of liquid-which turned out to be
   Three-in-One Oil for oiling the tape-recorder mechanisms-and Kesey and
   twelve others, including Babbs, Gretch, Hagen, Walker, Mountain Girl,
   Page, Cassady, and the Hermit, were booked on many charges, including
   possession of marijuana and narcotics paraphernalia (the syringe),
   resisting arrest and impairing the morals of minors (Mountain Girl and the
   Hermit). Even then, the whole thing became not much more than the
   cop-and-jailhouse-and-judge-and-lawyer game, with such high moments as
   when they all got bailed out and emerged from the jail in San Mateo and
   the Hermit's mother appeared. Hermit, they discovered from the police
   blotter, was named Anthony Dean Wells. Nobody had ever asked him what his
   name was. Anyway, his mother slapped Kesey across the face with a
   paperback edition of One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest and screamed, "Go
   back to your cuckoo pad! You should have stayed in the nest instead of
   flying over it, you big cuckoo!"

   Well, the whole thing was too much. When the cops booked them, Babbs gave
   his occupation as "movie producer," and Mountain Girl said she was a
   "movie technician." So Babbs solemnly appeared in the local newspapers as
   the big movie producer caught in the raid along with the big novelist,
   Kesey. It was something. The San Francisco newspapers took a very lively
   interest in the case and sent people out to interview Kesey within the
   Dope Den, and word of the Prankster life style was made public, however
   obliquely, for the first time.

   The publicity couldn't have been better, at least in terms of the
   hip-intellectual circles where the Pranksters might hope to have some
   immediate influence. Accusing somebody of possession of marijuana was like
   saying "I saw him take a drink." Kesey was referred to as a kind of
   "hipster Christ," "a modern mystic," after the model of Jack Kerouac and
   William Burroughs. As all could plainly read in the press, Kesey had gone
   even further. He had stopped writing. He was now working on a vast
   experimental movie entitled-the newspapers solemnly reported-Intrepid
   Traveler and His Merry Pranksters Leave in Search of a Cool Place.
   "Writers," he told a reporter, "are trapped by artificial rules. We are
   trapped in syntax. We are ruled by an imaginary teacher with a red
   ball-point pen who will brand us with an A-minus for the slightest
   infraction of the rules. Even Cuckoo seems like an elaborate commercial."

   LSD was never mentioned in all this. Kesey came off chiefly as a visionary
   who had forsaken his riches and his career as a novelist in order to
   explore new forms of expression. In the California press he graduated from
   mere literary fame to celebrity. If the purpose of the raid was to stamp
   out dopeniks-the cop game couldn't have backfired more completely.

   After Kesey and the Pranksters got out on bail, the legal wrangling went
   on interminably-but they all stayed free. Kesey had a team of aggressive,
   bright young lawyers working on the case, Zonker's brother-in-law Paul
   Robertson in San Jose, and Pat Hallinan and Brian Rohan from San
   Francisco. Hallinan was the son of Vincent Hallinan, the lawyer, a famous
   champion of the underdog. By and by the charges were dropped against
   everybody but Kesey and Page Browning, and even they ended up with only
   one charge lodged against them, possession of marijuana. They trooped down
   to Redwood City, the San Mateo County Seat, fifteen times during the last
   eight months of 1965, by Rohan's count. It was interminable, but they all
   stayed free . ..

   Yes! And heads, kids, kooks, intellectual tourists of all sorts, started
   heading for Kesey's in La Honda.

   Even Sandy Lehmann-Haupt returned. About a year had gone by and he was
   O.K. again and he flew into San Francisco. Kesey and four or five other
   Pranksters drove to the San Francisco Airport to meet him. As they drove
   back to La Honda, Sandy cheerfully gave a brief account of what had
   happened to him in Big Sur before he split like he did.

   "-then I started having dream wars... with somebody," said Sandy. He
   didn't want to say who.

   "Yeah, I know," said Kesey. "With me."

   He knew!

   And the mysto fogs began to roll in again off the bay ...

   NORMAN HARTWEG AND HIS FRIEND EVAN ENGBER DROVE UP to La Honda from Los
   Angeles with the idea of doing the Tibetan thing for a few weeks and
   seeing what it was all about. That was pretty funny, the idea of doing the
   Tibetan thing at Kesey's. Nevertheless, that was Norman's idea. Norman was
   a 17-year-old playwright from Ann Arbor, Michigan. He was a thin guy, five
   feet seven, with a thin face and sharp features and a beard. But his nose
   tilted up slightly, which gave him a boyish look. He was eking out a
   living by writing a column for the Los Angeles Free Press, a weekly, the
   L.A. counterpart of the Village Voice, and working on avant-garde films,
   and living in a room underneath the dance floor of a discotheque on the
   Sunset Strip. He had run into Kesey's friend Susan Brustman and then into
   Kesey himself, and Kesey had invited him up to La Honda to edit The Movie
   and ... partake of the life ... Somehow Norman got the idea the people at
   Kesey's were like, you know, monks, novitiates; a lot of meditating with
   your legs crossed, chanting, eating rice, feeling vibrations, walking
   softly over the forest floor and thinking big. Why else would they be out
   in the woods in the middle of nowhere?

   So Norman drove up from L.A. with Evan Engber, who was a theater director,
   occasionally, and, later, a member of Dr. West's Jug Band, and, as a
   matter of fact, the husband of Yvette Mimieux the movie actress. They
   drove up the coastal route, California Route 1, then cut over Route 84 at
   San Gregorio and on up into the redwood forests; around a bend, and
   they're at Kesey's. But jesus, somehow it doesn't look very Tibetan. It
   isn't the hanged man in the tree so much, or the statue of a guy eating
   it. Hell, there are no flies on the Tibetans. It is more the odd detail
   here and there. Kesey's mailbox, for example, which is red, white, and
   blue, the Stars and Stripes. And a big framed sign on top of the house: We
   Wuz Framed. And the front gate, across the wooden bridge. The gate is made
   of huge woodcutter's saw blades and has a death mask on it-and a big sign,
   about 15 feet long, that reads: The Merry Pranksters Welcome the Hell's
   Angels. Music is blasting out of some speakers on top of the house, a
   Beatles record-Help, I ne-e-e-ed somebody-

   At that moment, that very moment, Engber gets a stabbing pain in his left
   shoulder.

   "I don't know what it is, Norman," he says, "but it's killing  me. "

   They drive on in across the bridge and get out and go into the house
   looking for Kesey. Brown dogs belly through the flea clouds outside the
   house, coughing fruit flies. Engber clutches his shoulder. Inside, bright
   green-and-gold light streams in through the French doors onto the
   damnedest clutter. There are big pipes hanging down from the rafters in
   the main room, a whole row of them, like some enormous vertical xylophone.
   Also dolls, dolls hanging from the rafters, re-assembled dolls, dolls with
   the heads sticking out of a hip joint, a leg out of the neck joint, arm
   out of other leg joint, leg out of shoulder joint, and so on, and a
   Day-Glo navel. Also balloons, also Chianti bottles stuck on the rafters at
   weird angles somehow, as if they had been in the very process of falling
   to the floor and suddenly they froze there. And on the floor, on the
   chairs, on tables, on the couch, toys, and tape recorders, and pieces of
   tape recorders, and pieces of pieces of tape recorders, and movie
   equipment, and pieces of pieces of pieces of movie equipment, and tapes
   and film running all over the place, plaited in among wires and sockets,
   all of it in great spiral tangles, great celluloid billows, and a big
   piece of a newspaper headline cut out and stuck up on the wall: Hail to
   All Edges ... In the midst of all this, sitting toward the side, is a
   gangling girl, looks very Scandinavian, idling over a guitar, which she
   can't play, and she looks up at Norman and says:

   "We've all got hangups.. . and we've got to get rid of them." Yeah ...
   yeah ... I guess that's right. There ... on the other side here is a
   little figure with an enormous black beard. The little g-nome looks up at
   Norman. His eyes narrow and he breaks into a vast inexplicable grin,
   looking straight at Norman and then Engber, and then he goes scuttling out
   the door, snuffling and giggling to himself. Yeah .. . yeah ... I guess
   that's right, too. "I don't know what the hell has happened to me," says
   Engber, clutching his shoulder, "but it's getting worse."

   Norman keeps walking back through the house until he hits a bathroom. Only
   it is a madhouse of a bathroom. The walls, the ceilings, everything, one
   vast collage, lurid splashes of red and orange, lurid ads and lurid color
   photos from out of magazines, pieces of plastic, cloth, paper, streaks of
   Day-Glo paint, and from the ceiling and down one wall a wild diagonal romp
   of rhinoceroses, like a thousand tiny rhinoceroses chasing each other
   through Crazy Lurid Land. Over the top part of the mirror over the sink is
   a small death mask painted in Day-Glo. The mask hangs from a hinge. Norman
   lifts it up and underneath the mask is a typewritten message pasted on the
   mirror: "Now that I've got your attention ..."

   Norman and Engber go out back and head up the path that leads into the
   woods, to look for Kesey. Up past screaming Day-Glo tree trunks and tents
   here and there and some kind of weird cave down in a gully with Day-Glo
   objects glowing in the mouth of it and then into deep green glades under
   the redwoods with the lime light filtering through-and they keep coming
   upon weird objects. Suddenly, a whole bed, an old-fashioned iron bedstead,
   a mattress, a cover, but all glowing with mad stripes and swirls of
   orange, red, green yellow Day-Glo. Then a crazed toy horse in a tree
   trunk. Then a telephone-a telephone-sitting up on a tree stump, glowing in
   the greeny deeps with beautiful glowing cords of many colors coming out of
   it. Then a TV set, only with mad Day-Glo designs painted on the screen.
   Then into a clearing, a flash of sunlight, and down the slope, here comes
   Kesey. He looks twice as big as the time Norman saw him in L.A. He has on
   white Levi's and a white T-shirt. He walks very erect and his huge muscled
   arms swing loose. The redwoods soar all around.

   Norman says, "Hello-"

   But Kesey just nods slightly and smiles very faintly as if to say, You
   said you'd be here and here you are. Kesey looks around and then down the
   slope toward the tent plateaus and the house and the highway and says:

   "We're working on many levels here." -

   Engber clutches his shoulder and says:

   "I don't know what this thing is, Norman, but it's killing me. I've got to
   go back to L.A."

   "Well, O.K., Evan-"

   "I'll come back up when I get over it."

   Norman kind of knew he wouldn't, and he didn't, but Norman wanted to stick
   around.

   ALL RIGHT, FILM EDITOR, ARTICLE WRITER, PARTICIPANT-Observer, you're here.
   On with your ... editing writing observing. But somehow Norman doesn't
   start cutting film or writing his column. Almost immediately the strange
   atmosphere of the place starts rolling over him. There is an atmosphere
   of-how can one describe it?-we are all on to something here, or into
   something, but no one is going to put it into words for you. Put it into
   words-one trouble right away is that he finds it very hard to get into the
   conversations here in the house in the woods. Everyone is very friendly
   and most of them are outgoing. But they are all talking about-how can one
   describe it?-about. . . life, things that are happening around there,
   things they are doing-or about things of such an abstract and metaphorical
   nature that he can't fasten them, either. Then he realizes that what it
   really is is that they are interested in none of the common intellectual
   currency that makes up the conversations of intellectuals in Hip L.A., the
   standard topics, books, movies, new political movements-For years he and
   all his friends have been talking about nothing but intellectual products,
   ideas, concoctions, brain candy, shadows of life, as a substitute for
   living; yes. They don't even use the usual intellectual words here-mostly
   it is just thing.

   Cassady's thing is-christalmighty, Cassady-and it is with Cassady that he
   gets the first sense of the daily allegory at Kesey's, allegorical living,
   every action a demonstration of a lesson of life-like Cassady's Gestalt
   Driving-but that is your term ... Whenever there is any driving to be
   done, Cassady does it. That is Cassady's thing, or his thing on one level.
   They drive up the mountain, up to Skylonda, atop Cahill Ridge, for
   something. Coming back, down the mountain, Norman is in the back seat, two
   or three others are sitting front and back, and Cassady is driving. They
   start hauling down the mountain, faster and faster, the trees snapping by
   like in some kind of amusement park ride, only Cassady isn't looking at
   the road. Or holding onto the wheel. His right hand is flipping the dial
   on the radio. One rock 'n' roll number blips out here-I'm nurding ut noonh
   erlation-then another one here on the dial-vronnnh ba-bee suckpo
   pon-pon-all the time Cassady is whamming out the beat on the steering
   wheel with the heel of his left hand and the whole car seems to be
   shuddering with it-and his head is turned completely around looking Norman
   squarely in the eye and grinning as if he is having the most congenial
   delightful conversation with him, only Cassady is doing all the talking,
   an incredible oral fibrillation of words, nutty nostalgia-"a '46 Plymouth,
   you understand, gear shift like a Dairy Queen pulled up side a '47
   Chrysler jumpy little marshmallow fellow in there had a kickdown gear was
   gonna ossify the world, you understand"-all to Norman with the happiest
   smile in the world-

   You crazy fool-the truck-

   -at the last possible moment somehow Cassady fishtails the car back onto
   the inside of the curve and the truck shoots by clean black shot like a
   great 10-ton highballing tear drop of tar-Cassady still talking, hanging
   on the steering wheel, pounding and rapping away. Norman terrified; Norman
   looks at the others to see if-but they're all sitting there throughout the
   whole maniacal ride as if nothing out of the ordinary has happened at all.

   And maybe that's it-the first onset of Ahor paranoia hits-maybe that's it,
   maybe he has been sucked into some incredible trap by a bunch of
   dope-taking crazies who are going to toy with him, for what reason I do
   not-

   Back at the house he decides to get into his role of Journalist Reporter
   Observer. At least he will be doing something and be outside, sane,
   detached. He starts asking about this and that, about Cassady, about
   Babbs, about the ineffable things, about why-

   Mountain Girl explodes suddenly.

   "Why! Why! Why! Why! Why! Why! Why!" she says, throwing up her hands and
   shaking her head, with such an air of authority and conviction that he is
   crushed.

   Later Kesey comes in and happens to say in the course of
   something-"Cassady doesn't have to think any more"-then he walks away. It
   is as if for some reason he is furnishing Norman with part of the puzzle.

   Kesey keeps doing this kind of thing. As if by radar, Kesey materializes
   at the critical moment, in the cabin, out front, in the backhouse, up in
   the woods. The crisis may be somebody's personal thing or some group
   thing-suddenly Kesey pops up like Captain Shotover in Shaw's play
   Heartbreak House, delivers a line-usually something cryptic, allegorical,
   or merely descriptive, never a pronouncement or a judgment. Half the time
   he quotes the wisdom of some local sage-Page says, Cassady says, Babbs
   says-Babbs says, if you don't /(now what the next thing is, all you have
   to-and just as suddenly he's gone.

   For example-well, it always seems like there's no dissension around here,
   no arguments, no conflict, in spite of all these different and in some
   cases weird personalities ricocheting around and rapping and carrying on.
   Yet that is only an illusion. It is just that they don't have it out with
   one another. Instead, they take it to Kesey, all of them forever waiting
   for Kesey, circling around him.

   One kid, known as Pancho Pillow, was a ball-breaker freak. He has to break
   your balls by coming on obnoxious in any way he could dream up, after
   which you were supposed to reject him, after which he could feel hurt and
   blame you for... all. That was his movie. One night Pancho is in the house
   with a book about Oriental rugs, full of beautiful color plates, and he is
   rapping on and on about the beautiful rugs-

   "-like, man, I mean, these cats were turned on ten centuries ago, the
   whole thing, they had mandalas you never dreamed of-right?-look here, man,
   I want to blow your mind for you, just one time-"

   -and he sticks the book under some Prankster's nose-here's a beautiful
   color picture of an Isfahan rug, glowing reds and oranges and golds and
   starlike vibrating lines all radiating out from a medallion at the center-

   "No thanks, Pancho, I already had some."

   "Come on, man! I mean, like, I gotta share this thing, I gotta make you
   see it, I can't keep this whole thing to myself! Like, you know, I mean, I
   want to share it with you-you dig?-now you look at this one-"

   And so on, shoving the goddamn book at everybody, waiting for somebody to
   tell him to go fuck himself, at which point he can stalk out, fulfilled.

   Feed the hungry bee-but christ, this ball breaker is too much. So now all
   the Pranksters endure, waiting for one thing, waiting for Kesey to turn
   up. By and by the door opens and it's Kesey.

   "Hey man!" Pancho says and rushes up to him. "You gotta look at these
   things I found! I gotta turn you on to this, man! I mean, I really got to,
   because it will fucking blow your mind!" and he sticks the book in Kesey's
   face.

   Kesey just looks down at the picture of the Isfahan or the Shiraz or the
   Bakhtiari or whatever it is, as if he is studying it. And then he says,
   softly, in the Oregon drawl,

   "Why should I take your bad trip?"

   -without looking up, as if what he is saying has something to do with this
   diamond medallion here or this border of turtles and palms-

   "Bad trip!" Pancho screams. "What do you mean, bad trip!" and he throws
   the book to the floor, but Kesey is already off into the back of the
   house. And Pancho knows his whole thing is, in fact, not sharing beauty
   rugs at all, but simply his bad trip, and they all know that's what it's
   all about, and he \knows  they know it, and the whole game is over and so
   long, Pancho Pillow.

   AND YET IT BEGAN TO SEEM TO NORMAN THAT EVEN PANCHO was further into the
   group thing than he was. He felt useless. He never got to edit the movie.
   Kesey and Babbs would just say do some cutting. But he wanted to see the
   whole film first, a whole run-through, so he could see where it was going.
   It was the same with the group. He wanted to run the whole group back
   through his personal editing machine and see what the whole picture looked
   like and what the goal was. All the while it seemed like they were probing
   him, probing him, probing him for weaknesses. Bradley, of all people, blew
   up at him one morning, started calling him everything he could think of,
   apparently trying to stir him up. Norman was reading a Sanskrit textbook
   at the time, trying to learn the alphabet. He figured he might as well do
   that, since he wasn't doing anything else. He was also smoking a
   cigarette. Bradley starts in.

   "Every time you read a book or smoke a cigarette," he yells, "you're
   hitting me. Look at Pancho. Pancho's working. Pancho is writing poetry all
   the time, and every day he brings me a poem-"

   -which is ridiculous, Pancho's poems are so bad. In fact, it is so
   ridiculous Bradley breaks into a smile over it. Nevertheless, the point
   has been made. Which is that Norman is lazy, "personal." Reading is
   something that just gives pleasure to the reader. It is not for the group.
   Also smoking-a thing that begets nothing but itself. So he is telling
   Norman that he is lazy and not contributing. Which is true. He is right.
   But he wants to start a fight over it or something. This amuses Norman and
   he laughs at Bradley-Bradley-and yet even though it is only Bradley, it
   seems like an indication of how the rest feel. Otherwise Bradley probably
   never would have said anything. Norman becomes quieter and quieter, like a
   clam. And it seemed as if they laughed at him-

   "Not at you-with you," Kesey kept telling him, trying to josh him out of
   all his hangups and inferiorities.

   But the only thing that really helped was having Paul Foster turn up.

   Foster was a tall, curly-headed guy in his late twenties with a terrible
   stutter. He was a mathematician and had been working in Palo Alto as a
   computer programmer, making a lot of money, apparently. Then he started
   hanging out with some musicians and they turned him on to a few ...
   mind-expanders, and now Foster's life seemed to alternate between
   stretches of good straight computer programming, during which he wore a
   necktie and an iridescent teal-green suit of Zirconpolyesterethylene and
   was a formidable fellow in the straight world, and stretches of life with
   ... Speed, the Great God Rotor, during which he wore his Importancy Coat.
   This was a jacket he had turned into a collage. It had layers and layers
   of ribbons and slogan buttons and reflectors and Cracker Jack favors all
   over it, piled up and flapping in the breeze until it looked like a
   lunatic billowsleeve coat from out of the court of Louis XV. He moved into
   the tree. Sandy had built a house in the tree, a platform with a tent on
   it. Paul built one under it; O.K., a duplex tree house. Paul Foster came
   in with just an enormous amount of stuff, all this stuff. He brought it
   all in and he set up housekeeping in the tree. He put a window up in the
   tree, and a gate, and bookshelves. He had strange books. An encyclopedia,
   only it was an 1893 encyclopedia, and books on the strangest languages,
   Tagalog, Urdu, and apparently he knew something about all these languages
   ... and more and more stuff. He had a huge sack of googaws that he would
   carry around, of the weirdest stuff, bits of glittering glass and tin and
   transistor-radio shells, just the shells, and nails and screws and tops
   and tubes, and inside his sack of weird junk was a little sack that was a
   miniature of the big sack and contained tiny weird junk ... and you got
   the idea that somehow, somewhere in there was a very tiny little sack that
   contained very tiny weird junk, and that it went on that way into infinity
   ... He also had a lot of pens, some of them felt-nib pens with colors, and
   he sat up in the tree house while the old restless Roto-rooter, the good
   god Speed, scoured puns, puns, puns, puns, puns from out of the walls of
   his skull and he fashioned signs like one he put at the entrance of the
   place, where the driveway turned in to the bridge from Route 84, a sign
   reading: "No Left Turn Unstoned." Then people would come and he'd
   entertain them up in his tree house, and at night you would see it lit up
   like some mad thing, gleaming with Dali-Day-Glo swoops, and he would be up
   there drawing, drawing, drawing, drawing, or working on a huge mad
   scrapbook he had ...

   Norman and Paul Foster had a lot in common. They were both fairly good
   artists, they both had a certain fund of erudition erudition erudition.
   Foster, with his terrible stutter, valued privacy in the midst of it all,
   just as Norman did. Of course, Foster was proving himself a Prankster far
   faster than Norman was. It was a strange thing about that. There were no
   rules. There was no official period of probation, and no vote on is he or
   isn't he one of us, no blackballing, no tap on the shoulders. And yet
   there was a period of proving yourself, and everyone knew it was going on
   and no one ever said a word about it. In any case, Norman could talk to
   Foster, and that made all the difference. He didn't feel so desperately
   lonely any more. Also he suddenly saw that it wasn't just him-the
   Pranksters probed everybody, to make them bring their hangups out front to
   the point where they could act totally out front, live in the moment,
   spontaneously, and if needling was what it took to bring you that far-

   Foster is coming on, in the house, with these wild logical conundrums he
   had, only stuttering something awful:

   -Sup-puh-puh-puh-pose that that everything you per-per-per-perceive is
   only a . . ."-some long involved thing, and Mountain Girl breaks in:

   -B-b-b-b-b-but, P-P-P-P-P-P-Paul, I don't git the p-p-p-p-p-point about
   all this per-per-per-per-per-per-ception. I try to git it,
   b-b-b-b-b-b-b-but all I git is the w-w-w-w-w-w-words. How 'bout goin' over
   it ag-gih-gih-gih-gih-gih-gih-gih-gih-gih-gih-gih-gih-gih -gih-gihn!"

   Foster can't believe this performance. He stands there frozen with his
   eyes bugging out, bugging out, bugging out, bugging out bigger and bigger
   until he explodes:

   "Is that supposed to be funny! You've got a worse hangup than stuttering,
   Mountain Girl ! You've got a fat mouth and you don't know what to use it
   for! Ugly-that's your trip, the ugly trip! Well, all I know is-"

   "Yuh see!" Mountain Girl says. She is grinning, triumphant practically
   laughing and clapping her hands, she is so pleased with the results. "When
   you git mad, you don't stutter!"

   Foster freezes again. He stares at her. Then he wheels around and walks
   out the door without saying another word.

   The funny part is, she's right

   .

   WHAT WAS IT? ... IT WAS LIKE . . . WELL, YES! GROUP THERAPY, like a
   marathon encounter in group therapy, in which everybody is together for
   days, probing everybody's weaknesses, bringing everything out front. Only
   this was group therapy not for the middle-aged and fucked-up but for the
   Young! and Immune!-as if they were not patching up wrecks but tooling up
   the living for some incredible breakthrough, beyond catastrophe. Since
   time was, the serious concerns of man have always been fights against
   catastrophe, against sickness, war, poverty, enslavement, always the
   horsemen of the Apocalypse riding. But what to do in that scary void
   beyond catastrophe, where all, supposedly, will be possible-and Norman
   happens upon another of those strange, prophetic books on Kesey's shelf,
   Arthur Clarke's Childhood's End, in which . .. the Total Breakthrough
   generation is born on Earth and as mere infants they show powers of mind
   far beyond their parents' and they go off into a colony by themselves, not
   as individuals, however, but as one great colonial being, in the
   biological sense of the colonial animal, until, at last, the Earth, its
   mission complete, convulses, starts coming apart, and they, the children:
   "Something's starting to happen. The stars are becoming dimmer. It's as if
   a great cloud is coming up, very swiftly, all over over all the sky. But
   it isn't really a cloud. It seems to have some sort of structure-I can
   glimpse a hazy network of lines and bands that keep changing their
   position. It's almost as if the stars are tangled in a ghostly spider's
   web. The whole network is beginning to glow, to pulse with light, exactly
   as if it were alive . . . There's a great burning column, like a tree of
   fire, reaching above the western horizon. It's a long way off right around
   the world. I know where it springs from: they're on their way at last, to
   become part of the Overmind. Their probation is ended: they're leaving the
   last remnants of matter behind ... The whole landscape is lit up-it's
   brighter than day-reds and golds and greens are chasing each other across
   the sky-oh, it's beyond words, it doesn't seem fair that I'm the only one
   to see it-I never thought such colors-"

   In short, zonked out of their ever-loving gourds, man, and heading out
   toward... Edge City, absolutely, and we're truly synched tonight.

   -but no water spouts of Academie Franc,aise cherubim and water babies
   here, and no reverent toga-linen-flapping Gautama Buddha Orientals
   breathing out the spent Roquefort breath of spiritual detachment. Instead,
   somehow they're going to try it right down the main highway, eight lanes
   wide, heron-neck arc lamps rising up as far as the eye can see, and they
   will broadcast on all frequencies, waving American flags, turning up the
   Day-Glo and the neon of 1960s electro-pastel America, wired up and
   amplified, 327,000 horsepower, a fantasy bus in a science-fiction movie,
   welcoming all on board, no matter how unbelievably Truck Stop Low Rent or
   raunchy-

                                    chapter

                                      XIII

                               The Hell's Angels

   I DOUBT IF ANY OF THE PRANKSTERS TRULY UNDERSTOOD Mountain Girl, except
   for Kesey. Most of the time she was so 100 percent out front, coming on
   loud and clear and candid as a Mack truck, it never occurred to anybody
   that a whole side of her was hidden. Except for Kesey, as I say. Sometimes
   Kesey and Mountain Girl would disappear into the backhouse and lie on
   mattresses and just talk, Kesey rapping on about how he felt about all
   sorts of things, life, fate, Now-while Mountain Girl-one thought of hers
   making sorties through the soft word flow coming from Kesey on the
   mattress there-yes, well, and she told Kesey as frankly as she could about
   the last four or five years of her life. Kesey didn't understand
   completely. Namely, she was sometimes lonely as hell.

   Lonely? Why, for chrissake, Mountain Girl came swinging into every
   situation like on a vine, like Sheena, Queen of the Jungle. She was high
   in the Prankster hierarchy already. Nobody was closer to Kesey than
   Mountain Girl, not even Faye, it often seemed. But there it was: Kesey ..
   . Kesey was essential to Mountain Girl's whole life with the Pranksters.
   Without him, and Hassler, a weird loneliness could take over ... Hassler
   was the only other person she could talk to. Without Hassler- But it can
   be tense underneath in a commune, beautiful on one level, but you have to
   be willing to force it a little to keep it that way.

   It is really funny. This afternoon the sprinklers are ratcheting away all
   sprinkly and starchy on the lawns of Poughkeepsie. In August the sun
   causes such brown spots where the trees don't shade it, you understand.
   Well, freak that. The solution, Doctor, happens to be named Kesey. This
   sound now, Doctor, rising above the ratcheting, would probably throw your
   poor little thready heart into fibrillation. It's like a locomotive coming
   through the redwood trees around the bends down Route 84 from Skylonda.
   The Hell's Angels in running formation, to be exact, scores of the
   monsters, on Harley-Davidson 74s. Miss Carolyn Adams of Poughkeepsie,
   N.Y., is about to look this primordial menace in the face and bark
   bullshit commands at the Hell's Angels, which they obey, since the
   sunspots exploding in their eyes bedazzle the monsters. The energy flows
   from Kesey, Doctor, and there is not one goddamn thing to git your little
   heart scared of.

   KESEY MET THE HELL's ANGELS ONE AFTERNOON IN SAN Francisco through Hunter
   Thompson, who was writing a book about them. It turned out to be a
   remarkable book, as a matter of fact, called Hell's Angels, a Strange and
   Terrible Saga. Anyway, Kesey and Thompson were having a few beers and
   Thompson said he had to go over to a garage called the Box Shop to see a
   few of the Angels, and Kesey went along. A Hell's Angel named Frenchy and
   four or five others were over there working on their motorcycles and they
   took to Kesey right away. Kesey was a stud who was just as tough as they
   were. He had just been busted for marijuana, which certified him as Good
   People in the Angels' eyes. They told him you can't trust a man who hasn't
   done time, and Kesey was on the way to doing time, in any case. Kesey said
   later that the marijuana bust impressed them but they couldn't have cared
   less that he was a novelist. But they knew about that, too, and here was a
   big name who was friendly and interested in them, even though he wasn't a
   queer or a reporter or any of those other creep suck-ups who were coming
   around that summer.

   And a great many were coming around in the summer of 1965. The summer of
   1965 had made the Hell's Angels infamous celebrities in California. Their
   reputation was at its absolutely most notorious all-time highest. A series
   of incidents-followed by an amazing series of newspaper and magazine
   articles, Life and the Saturday Evening Post among them-had the people of
   the Far West looking to each weekend in the Angels' life as an invasion by
   baby-raping Huns. Intellectuals around San Francisco, particularly at
   Berkeley, at the University of California, were beginning to romanticize
   about the Angels in terms of "alienation" and "a generation in revolt,"
   that kind of thing. People were beginning to get in touch with Thompson to
   see if he couldn't arrange for them to meet the Angels-not the whole
   bunch, Hunter, maybe one or two at a time. Well, Kesey didn't need any one
   or two at a time. He and the boys took a few tokes on a joint, and the
   Hell's Angels were on the bus.

   The next thing the citizens of La Honda knew, there was a huge sign at the
   Kesey place-15 feet long, three feet high, in red white and blue.

                              The Merry Pranksters

                           Welcome the Hell's Angels

   Saturday, August 7, 1965, was a bright clear radiant limelit summer day
   amid God's handiwork in La Honda, California. The citizens were getting
   ready for the day by nailing shut their doors. The cops were getting ready
   by revving up a squad of ten patrol cars with flashing lights and
   ammunition. The Pranksters were getting ready by getting bombed. They were
   down there in the greeny gorge, in the cabin and around it, under the
   redwoods, getting bombed out of their gourds. They had some good heavy
   surges of God-given adrenaline going for them, too. Nobody ever came right
   out front and said it, but this happened to be the real-life Hell's Angels
   coming, about forty of them, on a full-fledged Angels' "run," the sort of
   outing on which the Angels did their thing, their whole freaking thing, en
   mangy raunchy head-breaking fire-pissing rough-goddamn-housing masse. The
   Pranksters had a lot of company for the occasion. It was practically like
   an audience, all waiting for the stars to appear. A lot of the old Perry
   Lane crowd was there, Vic Lovell, Ed McClanahan, and the others. Allen
   Ginsberg was there and so was Richard Alpert and a lot of San Francisco
   and Berkeley intellectuals. Tachycardia, you all-but Kesey was calm and
   even laughing a little, looking strong as an ox in his buckskin shirt, the
   Mountain Man, and he made it all seem right and inevitable, an inevitable
   part of the flow and right now in this moment. Hell, if the straight world
   of San Mateo County, California, had decided to declare them all outlaws
   over an innocuous thing like marijuana, then they could freaking well go
   with the flow and show them what the saga called Outlaw was really like.
   The Angels brought a lot of things into synch. Outlaws, by definition,
   were people who had moved off of dead center and were out in some kind of
   Edge City. The beauty of it was, the Angels had done it like the
   Pranksters, by choice. They had become outlaws first- to explore,
   muvva-and then got busted for it. The Angels' trip was the motorcycle and
   the Pranksters' was LSD, but both were in an incredible entry into an
   orgasmic moment, now, and within forty-eight hours the Angels would be
   taking acid on board, too. The Pranksters would be taking on . .. Ahor,
   the ancient horror, the middle-class boy fear of Hell's Angels. Hell's
   Angels, in the dirty flesh, and if they could bring that dark deep-down
   thing into their orbit-

   Kesey ! What in the freaking-tachycardia, you all...

   Bob Dylan's voice is raunching and rheuming in the old jack-legged chants
   in huge volume from out the speakers up in the redwood tops up on the dirt
   cliff across the highway-He-e-e-ey Mis-ter Tam-bou-rine Man-as part of
   Sandy Lehmann-Haupt's Non-Station KLSD program, the indomitable
   disco-freak-jockey Lord Byron Styrofoam himself, Sandy, broadcasting over
   a microphone in a cabin and spinning them for you-Cassady revved up so
   tight it's like mechanical speed man sprocket-Mountain Girl ready-Hey,
   Kesey!-Hermit grin- Page ablaze-men, women, children, painted and in
   costume- ricochet around the limelit dell-Argggggghhhhh-about 3 p.m. they
   started hearing it.

   It was like a locomotive about ten miles away. It was the Hell's Angels in
   "running formation" coming over the mountain on Harley-Davidson 74s. The
   Angels were up there somewhere weaving down the curves on Route 84,
   gearing down- thragggggggggh-and winding up, and the locomotive sound got
   louder and louder until you couldn't hear yourself talk any more or Bob
   Dylan rheumy and-thraaaaaaaggggghhh-here they came around the last curve,
   the Hell's Angels, with the bikes, the beards, the long hair, the
   sleeveless denim jackets with the death's head insignia and all the rest,
   looking their most royal rotten, and then one by one they came barreling
   in over the wooden bridge up to the front of the house, skidding to a stop
   in explosions of dust, and it was like a movie or something-each one of
   the outlaws bouncing and gunning across the bridge with his arms spread
   out in a tough curve to the handlebars and then skidding to a stop, one
   after another after another.

   The Angels, for their part, didn't know what to expect. Nobody had ever
   invited them anywhere before, at least not as a gang. They weren't on many
   people's invitation lists. They figured they would see what was there and
   what it was all about, and they would probably get in a hell of a fight
   before it was all over, and heads would break, but that was about par for
   the course anyway. The Angels always came into alien situations black and
   wary, sniffing out the adversary, but that didn't even register at this
   place. So many people were already so high, on something, it practically
   dissolved you on the spot. The Pranksters had what looked like about a
   million doses of the Angels' favorite drug-beer-and LSD for all who wanted
   to try it. The beer made the Angels very happy and the LSD made them
   strangely peaceful and sometimes catatonic, in contrast to the Pranksters
   and other intellectuals around, who soared on the stuff.

   June the Goon gave a Hell's Angel named Freewheeling Frank some LSD, which
   he thought was some kind of souped-up speed or something-and he had the
   most wondrous experience of his life. By nightfall he had climbed a
   redwood and was nestled up against a loudspeaker in a tree grooving off
   the sounds and vibrations of Bob Dylan singing "The Subterranean Homesick
   Blues."

   Pete, the drag racer, from the San Francisco Hell's Angels, grinned and
   rummaged through a beer tub and said, "Man, this is nothing but a goddamn
   wonderful scene. We didn't know what to expect when we came, but it turned
   out just fine. This time it's all ha-ha, not thump-thump." Soon the gorge
   was booming with the Angels' distinctive good-time lots-a-beer belly
   laugh, which goes: Haw!-Haw!-Haw!-Haw!-Haw!- Haw!

   Sandy Lehmann-Haupt, Lord Byron Styrofoam, had hold of the microphone and
   his disco-freak-jockey rapping blared out of the redwoods and back across
   the highway: "This is Non-Station KLSD, 800 micrograms in your head, the
   station designed to blow your mind and undo your bind, from up here atop
   the redwoods on Venus!" Then he went into a long talking blues song about
   the Hell's Angels, about fifty stanzas worth, some of it obscure acid
   talk, some of it wild legends, about squashing turtles on the highway,
   nutty stuff like that, and every stanza ending with the refrain:

                       Oh, but it's great to be an Angel,

                           And be dirty all the time!

   What the hell-here was some wild-looking kid with the temerity to
   broadcast out over the highways of California that Angels | were dirty all
   the time-but how the hell could you resist, it was too freaking madly
   manic-and pretty soon the Angels and everybody else were joining in the
   chorus:

                       Oh, but it's great to be an Angel,

                           And be dirty all the time!

   Then Allen Ginsberg was in front of the microphone with finger cymbals on
   each hand, dancing around with a beard down to his belly and chanting
   Hindu chants into the microphone booming out over California, U.S.A., Hare
   Krishna hare Krishna hare Krishna hare krishna-what the mollyfock is hairy
   krishna-who is this hairy freak-but you can't help yourself, you got to
   groove with this cat in spite of yourself. Ginsberg really bowled the
   Angels over. He was a lot of things the Angels hated, a Jew, an
   intellectual, a New Yorker, but he was too much, the greatest straightest
   unstraight guy they ever met.

                           And be dirty all the time!

   The filthy kooks-by nightfall the cops were lined up along the highway,
   car after car, just across the creek, outside the gate, wondering what the
   fock. The scene was really getting weird. The Pranksters had everything in
   their electronic arsenal going, rock 'n' roll blazing through the
   treetops, light projections streaming through the gorge, Station KLSD
   blazing and screaming over the cops' heads, people in Day-Glo regalia
   blazing and lurching in the gloom, the Angels going Haw-Haw-Haw- Haw,
   Cassady down to just his hell of a build, nothing else, just his hell of a
   build, jerking his arms out and sprocketing around under a spotlight on
   the porch of the log manse, flailing a beer bottle around in one hand and
   shaking his other one at the cops:

   "You sneaky motherfuckers! What the fuck's wrong with you! Come on over
   here and see what you get... goddamn your shit-filled souls
   anyway!"-laughing and jerking and sprocketing-"Don't fuck with me, you
   sons of shit-lovers. Come on over. You'll get every fucking thing you
   deserve."

   The hell of it, men, is here is a huge obscene clot of degradation,
   depradation and derogation proceeding loose and crazed on the hoof before
   our very eyes, complete with the very Hell's Angels, and there is nothing
   we can do but contain it. Technically, they might have been able to move
   in on the grounds of Cassady's exposing himself or something of the sort,
   but no real laws were being broken, except every law of God and man-but
   sheer containment was looking like the best policy. Moving in on those
   crazies even with ten carloads of armed cops for a misdemeanor like lewd
   display-the explosion was too grotesque to think of. And the cops' turret
   lights revolved and splashed against the dirt cliff in a red strobe light
   effect and their car-to-headquarters radios were wide open and cracking
   out with sulphurous 220-volt electric thorn baritones and staticky
   sibilants-He-e-e-ey Mis-ter Tam-bou-rine Man-just to render the La Honda
   gorge totally delirious.

   Meanwhile, the Angels were discovering the goddamnedest thing. Usually,
   most places they headed into on their runs, they tested people's cool.
   What are you looking at, mother. As soon as the shock or naked terror
   registered, they would be happy. Or if there was no shock and terror but
   instead somebody tried some brave little shove back, then it was time to
   break heads and tear everybody a new asshole. But these mollyfocking
   Pranksters were test-proof. The Angels didn't know what permissive was
   until they got to Kesey's. Go with the flow! The biggest baddest toughest
   most awfulest-looking Hell's Angel of them all was a big monster named
   Tiny. The second biggest baddest toughest most-awfulest-looking Hell's
   Angel was a big raw-boned guy named Buzzard, dark-looking, with all this
   dark hair and a beard, all shaggy and matted and his nose came out like a
   beak and his Adam's apple hung down about a foot, and he was just like an
   enormous buzzard. Tiny and Buzzard had a thing of coming up to each other
   when they were around non-Angels and sticking out their tongues and then
   licking each other's tongues, a big sloppy lap it up, just to shake up the
   squares, it really jolted them-so they came up right in front of this tall
   broad of Kesey's, Mountain Girl, and la-a-a-a-a-ap-and they couldn't
   believe it. She just looked right at them and grinned and exploded
   sunballs out of her eyes and started laughing at them, Haw-Haw-Haw, as if
   to say in plain language: What a bullshit thing. It was freaking
   incredible. Then some of them passed a joint around and they passed it to
   Mountain Girl and she boomed out:

   "Hell, no! What the hell you doing putting your dirty mouth on this clean
   joint for! This is a clean joint and you're putting your dirty mouths on
   it!" Nobody in living memory had ever refused a toke from a joint passed
   by Angels, at least not on grounds of sanitation, except this crazy girl
   who was just bullshitting them blind, and they loved it.

   It even got to the point where Mountain Girl saw Tiny heading into the mad
   bathroom with a couple of beer cans like he is going to hole up in there
   and drink a couple of cans in peace, but this is the bathroom all the
   girls around here are using, and Mountain Girl yells out to Sonny Barger,
   the maximum leader of the Hell's Angels, "Hey, Sonny! Tell this big piece
   of trash to stay out of our clean bathroom!"-in a bullshit tone, of
   course-and Sonny picks it up, "Yeah, you big piece of trash! Stay out of
   the clean bathroom! They don't want you in there!"-and Tiny slinks out the
   door, outside, in a bullshit slink, but he does it-

   And that's it! It's happening. The Hell's Angels are in our movie, we've
   got 'em in. Mountain Girl and a lot of the Pranksters had hit on the
   perfect combination with the Angels. They were friendly toward them, maybe
   friendlier than anybody had been in their lives, but they weren't craven
   about it, and they took no shit. It was the perfect combination, but the
   Pranksters didn't even have to think of it as a combination. They just did
   their thing and that was the way it worked out. All these principles they
   had been working on and talking about in the isolation of La Honda-they
   freaking well worked.

   Go with the flow-and what a flow-these cats, these Pranksters-at big routs
   like this the Angels often had a second feature going entitled Who Gets
   Fucked?-and it hadn't even gotten to that before some blonde from out of
   town, one of the guests from way out there, just one nice soft honey
   hormone squash, she made it clear to three Angels that she was ready to
   go, so they all trooped out to the backhouse and they had a happy round
   out there. Pretty soon all the Angels knew about the "new mamma" out in
   the backhouse and a lot of them piled in there, hooking down beers,
   laughing, taking their turns, making various critiques. The girl had her
   red and white dress pushed up around her chest, and two or three would be
   on her at once, between her legs, sitting on her face in the sick ochre
   light of the shack with much lapping and leering and bubbling and gulping
   through furzes of pubic hair while sweat and semen glistened on the
   highlights of her belly and thighs and she twitched and moaned, not in
   protest, however, in a kind of drunken bout of God knew what and men with
   no pants on were standing around, cheering, chiding, waiting for their
   turn, or their second turn, or the third until she had been fenestrated in
   various places at least fifty times. Some of the Angels went out and got
   her ex-husband. He was weaving and veering around, bombed, they led him in
   there under glare and leer and lust musk suffocate the rut hut they told
   him to go to it. All silent-shit, this is going too far-but the girl rises
   up in a blear and asks him to kiss her, which he does, glistening
   secretions, then he lurches and mounts her and slides it in, and the
   Angels cheer Haw Haw-

   -but that is her movie, it truly is, and we have gone with the flow.

   So much beer-which is like an exotic binge for the Pranksters, beer.
   Mountain Girl and Kesey are up in the limelit bower and the full moon
   comes down through the treetop silhouettes. They are just rapping in the
   moonlight, and then Sandy wanders on up there and sits with them, high on
   acid, and he looks down and the floor of the forest is rippling with
   moonlight, the ground shimmers and rolls like a stream in the magic bower
   and they just sit there-a buzzard! Buzzard is wandering up the slope
   toward them and there in the moonlight in the dark in the magic bower
   he... is a buzzard, the biggest ever made, the beak, the deathly black,
   the dopply glottal neck, the shelled back and dangling wings, stringy
   nodule legs-Kaaawwwwwww!-and Kesey jumps up and starts throwing his arms
   up at him, like the way you would scare away a buzzard, and says,

   "Aaaaagh! a buzzard! Hey! Get away, you're a buzzard! Get this buzzard out
   of here!"

   It's a bullshit gesture, of course-and Buzzard laughs-Haw! Haw! Haw!-it is
   not real, but it is... real, real buzzard, you can see the whole thing
   with two minds-Kaw Kaw Kaaawwwww-and Buzzard jumps and flaps his arms-and
   the whole ... connection, the synch, between the name, the man, the bird,
   flows together right there, and it doesn't matter whether he is buzzard or
   man because it has all come together, and they all see it...

   They all see so much. Buzzard goes, and Sandy goes, and Kesey and Mountain
   Girl are in the moonlight ripply bower. By and by-where?-Kesey and
   Mountain Girl-and so much flows together from the lights and the delirium
   and the staticky sibilants down below, so much is clear, so much flows in
   Tightness, that night, under the full moon, up above the flails and
   bellows down below-

                                     * * *

   THE HELL'S ANGELS PARTY WENT ON FOR TWO DAYS AND THE cops never moved in.
   Everybody, Angels and Pranksters, had a righteous time and no heads were
   broken. There had been one gang-bang, but the girl was a volunteer. It was
   her movie. In fact, for the next six or seven weeks, it was one long party
   with the Angels. The news spread around intellectual-hip circles in the
   San Francisco-Berkeley area like a legend. In these circles, anyway, it
   once and for all put Kesey and the Pranksters up above the category of
   just another weirdo intellectual group. They had broken through the worst
   hangup that intellectuals know-the real-life hangup. Intellectuals were
   always hung up with the feeling that they weren't coming to grips with
   real life. Real life belonged to all those funky spades and prize fighters
   and bullfighters and dock workers and grape pickers and wetbacks.
   Nostalgie de la boue. Well, the Hell's Angels were real life. It didn't
   get any realer than that, and Kesey had pulled it off. People from San
   Francisco and Berkeley started coming by La Honda more than ever. It was
   practically like an intellectual tourist attraction. Kesey would talk
   about the Angels.

   "I asked Sonny Barger how he picks new members, new Angels, and he told
   me, 'We don't pick 'em. We recognize 'em.' "

   And everybody grokked over that.

   Likely as not, people would find Hell's Angels on the place. The Angels
   were adding LSD to the already elaborate list of highs and lows they
   liked, beer, wine, marijuana, benzedrine, Seconal, Amytal, Nembutal,
   Tuinal. Some of them had terrible bummers-bummer was the Angels' term for
   a bad trip on a motorcycle and very quickly it became the hip world's term
   for a bad trip on LSD. The only bad moment at Kesey's came one day when an
   Angel went berserk during the first rush of the drug and tried to strangle
   his old lady on Kesey's front steps. But he was too wasted at that point
   to really do much.

   So it was wonderful and marvelous, an unholy alliance, the Merry
   Pranksters and the Hell's Angels, and all hours of the day or night you
   could hear the Hell's Angels gearing and winding down Route 84 to Kesey's,
   and the people of La Honda felt like the plague had come, and wasn't there
   anything that could be done. More than one of the Pranksters had his
   reservations, too. The Angels were like a time bomb. So far, so good-one
   day the Angels even swept and cleaned up the place-but they were capable
   of busting loose into carnage at any moment. It brought the adrenaline
   into your throat. The potential was there, too, because if the truth were
   known, there were just a few of the Pranksters who could really talk to
   the Angels-chiefly Kesey and Mountain Girl. Mainly it was Kesey. Kesey was
   the magnet and the strength, the man in both worlds. The Angels respected
   him and they weren't about to screw him around. He was one of the coolest
   guys they had ever come across. One day, finally, Kesey's cool came to the
   test with the Angels and it was a strange moment.

   Kesey and the Pranksters and the Angels had taken to going out to the
   backhouse and sitting in a big circle and doing the Prankster thing, a lot
   of rapping back and forth and singing, high on grass, and you never knew
   where it was going to go. Usually it went great. The Angels took to the
   Prankster thing right away. They seemed to have an immediate intuitive
   grasp of where it was going, and one time Kesey started playing a regular
   guitar and Babbs started playing a four-string amplified guitar and Kesey
   got into a song, off the top of his head, about "the vibrations," a bluesy
   song, and the Angels joined in, and it got downright religious in there
   for a while, with everybody singing, "Oh, the vi-bra-tions ... Oh, the
   vi-bra-tions .. ."

   And then Kesey and a few of the Pranksters and a lot of the Angels,
   including Sonny Barger of the Oakland Chapter, the maximum leader of all
   the Angels, were sitting around in the backhouse passing around joints and
   rapping. The subject was "people who are bullshit."

   There are certain people who are bullshit and you can always recognize
   them, Kesey was saying, and the Angels were nodding yeah, that certainly
   is right.

   "Now you take-," said Kesey, mentioning one of the Angels who was not
   present. "He's a bullshit person."

   A bullshit person-and man-

   "Listen, Kesey," says Barger, 100 percent Hell's Angel, "-is an Angel, and
   nobody-nobody-calls an Angel a bullshit person."

   -the freaking gauntlet is down. It's like forever and every eye in the
   place pins on Kesey's face and you can hear the blood squirt in your
   veins. But Kesey doesn't even blink and his voice doesn't even change one
   halftone, just the old Oregon drawl:

   "But I know him, Sonny. If I didn't know him, I wouldn't call him a
   bullshit person."

   Yeah-we-e-e-elll-everybody, Angels and Pranksters- well-Kesey knows
   him-there is nothing to do but grok over this statement, and everybody
   sits there, still, trying to grok over it, and after a second, the moment
   where heads get broken and fire gets pissed is over-We-e-ell, ye-ah-

   Two or three days later it occurs to some of the Pranksters that they
   still don't know what the hell Kesey meant when he said that. He knows the
   guy. It doesn't make any sense. It's a concept with no bottom to it-but so
   what! At the moment he said it, it was the one perfect thing he could have
   said. Kesey was so totally into the moment, he could come up with it, he
   could break up that old historic push me, shove you, yeah-sez-who sequence
   and in an instant the moment, that badass moment, was over.

   THE PRANKSTERS GOT PRETTY CLOSE TO SEVERAL OF THE Angels as individuals.
   Particularly Gut and Freewheeling Frank and Terry the Tramp. Every now and
   then somebody would take one or another of the Angels up into the tree
   house and give them a real initiation into psychedelics. They had a huge
   supply of DMT. As somebody once put it, LSD is a long strange journey; DMT
   is like being shot out of a cannon. There in the tree house, amid the
   winking googaws, they would give the Angels DMT, and Mountain Girl saw
   some of them, like Freewheeling Frank, after they came down. They would
   walk around in no particular direction, listing slightly, the eyes bugged
   wide open, glazed.

   "They were as naked as an Angel is ever gonna git," she told Kesey.

                                    chapter

                                      XIV

                                  A Miracle in

                                   Seven Days

   Oh, the vi-bra-tions...

   Oh, the Unitarians ...

   Apostate seminarians.. .

   Grok the groovy

   Pranksters and Hell's Angels...

   Whose Angels?-

   Why the consternation?

   Arise ye antediluvians,

   Groove on

   The Pranksters and Hell's Angels ...

   Noah's destination

   Is where it's at:

   Now showing at the Mount Ararat,

   Apis the Bull in Apres le deluge,

   Groovy movie with a thousand castoffs:

   Whose Angels?-

   Hell's Angels...

   Dear Lord, prepare to blast off

   Into the Angel blue.

   Oh, the vi-bra-tions ...

   Among those who began to wonder about the mysteries of La Honda

   Were some Unitarian ministers known as the Young Turks;

   Bob Kimball, Dick Weston and Paul Sawyer said freak our cerebral cloisters
   and

   Emerge! See how the alleged grass-smoking Kesey's magic works.

   The Young Turks saw Unitarians becoming ghostly seminarians,

   Desiccated Kantians cut off from Early Christianity.

   Oh, a century ago we were the vangard, routing the redneck blackguards

   Of Fundamentalism-and today?-the Youth yawn at our inanity.

   Oh, the vi-bra-tions...

   Oh, the Unitarians...

   Apostate seminarians...

   Grok the groovy

   Pranksters and Hell's Angels...

   Whose Angels?-

   Sawyer found our Day-Glo heroes on the beach at Pescadero

   One sunny afternoon with Allen Ginsberg in his finest bearded form.

   The scene was charged with energy, yet there was a weird serenity

   Even when the Hell's Angels pulled in, ran\ but most righteously warm.

   Now, Sawyer had his teenage daughter along and she feared something
   might... go wrong.

   When Kesey said, On the bus! she said, "Daddy, I... don't want to go."

   So his daughter stayed behind, but Sawyer was determined to find

   The secret of this vibrant communion: Angel Black & Prankster Day-Glo.

   Oh, the vi-bra-tions. ..

   Oh, the Unitarians...

   Apostate seminarians ...

   Grok the groovy

   Pranksters and Hell's Angels ...

   Whose Angels?-

   Onto the bus! and it was so fine, with Angels hooking down great jugs of
   wine

   And grooving on the sunlit ocean like euphoric Nature freaks,

   Passing joints and Haw!-Haw!-Hawing! but coursing through their raucous
   bawling-

   A precognitive Early Churchly Gnostic note: Ecstatic Peace!

   Kesey knows precisely what he's about! No motorcycle beatnik rout

   But a trip more vital than all the Kantian prattle in the world.

   He has reached the unreachable! Taught and learned from the unteachable!

   The Young Turks owed it to the Church to give the Prankster trip a whirl.

   Oh, the vi-bra-tions...

   Oh, the Unitarians ...

   Apostate seminarians...

   Grok the groovy

   Pranksters and Hell's Angels...

   Whose Angels?-

   Why the consternation?

   Arise ye antediluvians,

   Groove on

   The Pranksters and Hell's Angels ...

   Noah's destination

   Is where it's at:

   Now showing at the Mount Ararat,

   Apis the Bull in Apres le deluge,

   Groovy movie with a thousand castoffs:

   Whose Angels?-

   Hell's Angels ...

   Dear Lord, prepare to blast off

   Into the Angel blue.

   Oh, the vi-bra-tions...

   So Kesey was invited to come take part in the annual California Unitarian
   Church conference at Asilomar, beautiful state park by the sea in
   Monterey. The theme this year was: "Shaking the Foundations."

   The fact that Kesey had lately been arrested on a narcotics charge
   couldn't have mattered less to the Unitarians assembled on the greeny
   glades of Asilomar by the sea, not even the older ones. The Unitarians had
   a long tradition of liberalism in such matters and, in fact, were in the
   vanguard of the civil-rights movement in California. There was a good deal
   of civil disobedience and scrapes with the police in that fight; yes, sir.
   But this ...

   ... this...  The Unitarians were assembled there in Intellectual Sport
   Shirt multitudes-intellectuals Roughing-it, you understand, in
   short-sleeved sport shirts and casual Stretcheez trousers with roomy
   bottoms and waists up about the rib cage, drawing, casually, on pipes. And
   here came Kesey. But not alone, it so happened. He arrived on the bus, in
   a blur of Day-Glo swirls, with Pranksters in costume flapping out of every
   portal. Among the middle-aged Unitarians, ministers and laymen, tamping
   down their pipes for a nice relaxed Sport Shirt week, there was
   consternation written on practically every face as they watched the
   bizarre vehicle pitching and rolling into the camp grounds. Things were
   ... up tight from the moment they got there.

   I guess this is kind of rubbing their noses in it, thought Kesey. The
   Unitarians are people who stand up for the right to dissent and
   nonconformity and a lot of other good things, and we're rubbing their
   noses in it-a bunch of dope fiends, a couple of ex-convicts, one
   homosexual, men and women living on a bus .. .

   But the Unitarian ... Youth, the teenagers weren't up tight at all. They
   flocked around the bus as soon as it got there. Which only wound their
   parents up tighter, of course. By nightfall the Unitarian Church in
   California was divided into two camps: on the bus and off the bus.

   Kesey's very first appearance on the rostrum got three-fourths of the
   Sport Shirts so up tight, the conference was ready to fly apart. The main
   programs were held in a rustic summer-theater-type building on the camp
   grounds. Kesey appeared at the rostrum in a glowing Yin-Yang jacket. It
   was an iridescent jacket with a huge Yin-Yang symbol painted on the back
   in red, white, and blue.

   "We're going to be here seven days," said Kesey, "so we're going to try to
   work a miracle in seven days-"

   -and not by talking about it, bub, but by doing it, all of us together,
   and not by me talking at you, either, but by all of us doing our thing out
   front and wailing with it.

   Many of the women at the conference began to look, rapt, at this rugged,
   virile man of action who now manned the pulpit. The Sports Shirts did not
   fail to take note of that rapt gleam on their chops, either.

   Paul Sawyer, in the front row, was aware of the tension building up; but
   so far, all to the good. "Shake the Foundations" was the name of the
   conference, and so let it be. Sawyer was sitting next to Mountain Girl.
   What an amazing creature!-sitting next to him here in a vast purple robe.
   By a remarkable coincidence-coincidence?-she had been brought up as a
   Unitarian herself and had been a member of the real hope of the church,
   the LRY, the Liberal Religious Youth. And now-but had she really strayed
   far from what the LRY ought to be? It was debatable ...

   Onstage, Kesey, not talking in any formal way, more like performing,
   working magic-telling of the kind of symbols we use and the games we're
   in, and how you can't really know what an emotion is until you've
   experienced both sides of it, whereupon he seizes the big American flag up
   on the stage and steps on it, grinds it into the floor-

   -huge gasp from the crowd, many of whom are teenagers-

   Sawyer is already into the thing, and he sees what Kesey is trying to
   do-don't just describe an emotion, but arouse it, make them experience it,
   by manipulating the symbol of the emotion, and sometimes we have to come
   into awareness through the back door. Sawyer hears sobs, wheels around in
   his seat, sees a group of teenagers behind him, from Salt Lake City, looks
   into their faces, reads the horror that fills them-The Flag!-then feels
   the manic energy from the crazed thing that has been packed into these
   children even at this age like a time warp vibration from the Salem witch
   hysteria, the primordial cry of Die, Infidel-and yet he can't leave them
   with that. So he rises up and faces the crowd and says,

   -Now wait a minute. That flag is a symbol we attach our emotions to, but
   it isn't the emotion itself and it isn't the thing we really care about.
   Sometimes we don't even realize what we really care about, because we get
   so distracted by the symbols. I remember when I was at school, we used to
   sing America the Beautiful and somebody would walk down the aisle carrying
   the flag. I always wanted to be the one who carried the flag down the
   aisle but I never was. Now, what was I really feeling? Patriotism? Or was
   it-

   But he doesn't get to finish. A voice cries: "Do it!"

   -what?

   "Do it!" It's Mountain Girl, beaming at him from her folds of purple,
   quite delighted with the turn of events.

   Before he knows it, he is leading them all in the singing of America the
   Beautiful, and O beau-ti-ful for spa-cious skies rings out in the hall-as
   he holds the flag staunchly in his hands and marches up the aisle and then
   down the aisle, signifying-what? Ne'mind! But exactly! Don't explain it.
   Do it!

   LIKE MOST CONFERENCES, THIS ONE HAD A CAREFULLY prepared and printed
   schedule of meals, talks, seminars, group activities. The Pranksters made
   a good quick hash of that. They had no schedule and intimated nobody else
   should, either. The Sport Shirts would have a big seminar planned to
   capture the imagination of the Youth-something on the order of Student
   Rebellion in an Age of Mediocrity: Challenge and Responsibility-only at
   the appointed hour the Youth, the student rebels in an age of mediocrity,
   would be down by the beach, down around the damnable bus, where the
   Pranksters had their own program, and no schedule, friends and neighbors,
   everything happens at the hour of  Now and all can join in the game of
   Power:::::

   Somebody wins the Power and orders a game of football to be played on the
   beach, only with the Hermit as the football. Presently a whole group,
   Pranksters, ministers, conferees, are picking up the giggling Hermit and
   handing him off like a quarterback would and scrambling for him like a
   loose football, and so on. But soon the grief of it-allegory!-begins to
   sink in, this making of a human being a counter in the power game, always
   the weakest... Ahhh! One of the young ministers, one of the Young Turks,
   now has the power, and he orders that all go into the surf of the Pacific
   and wash one another's feet. Ritual of humility, allegory of life, but not
   a word of explanation need be spoken, and they all just sit down in the
   surf and wash one another's feet, and the Hermit's most meticulously, and
   the Pranksters really groove with this. They think this is great. And the
   kids now look at the Young Turk whose inspiration it was in a new light.
   He has made it. The Pranksters approve of him!

   The Young Turks spent more and more time with the Pranksters, late into
   the night, while the music played on the bus, and the Pranksters brought
   huge strands of kelp out of the ocean and flailed it about and beat the
   sides of the bus with it, like a huge drum, and played the Power game and
   took the Now Trip and played the non-games of life, and kept rapping away,
   but more than rapping, being, being alive-the Young Turks were truly on
   the bus. From the lack of sleep and the pace and weird shaking of the
   foundations, they began to feel the mysto thing most profoundly.

   Paul Sawyer was walking back to go to bed about 7 a.m. one morning after
   an all-night stand with the Pranksters when he was met by a delegation of
   conference officials. They wanted to have it out. They wanted to ask Kesey
   and the Pranksters to leave. Kesey might be sincere, they said, and he
   might not. But in any case he was disrupting the conference and causing a
   schism in the conferees, and setting an atrocious example for the Youth.
   It seemed that Dr. -, one of the Church's greatest liberals and a leader
   in the civil-rights movement, had already left the conference in protest
   and taken a couple of other ministers with him.

   -Wait a minute, says Sawyer. We called this conference to shake the
   foundations. And, well, now they are beginning to shake, and it's time to
   see whether we have the courage of our convictions.

   -Well, yes, Paul, but there are these things they are doing, and the park
   officials are quite upset. First of all, there is a very strong suspicion
   that they are indulging in marijuana. There is a very peculiar smell
   around that bus. But let us leave that aside. In any case, the bus is a
   very definite health nuisance, all those people living together on that
   bus by the side of the water. It isn't sanitary. But let us leave that
   aside, too. There is also the incident of the shower room. Park personnel
   caught two of these. . . Pranksters taking a shower together, a man and a
   woman, in the men's shower room. Now we might overlook that sort of thing,
   but what kind of an example is that for the young people? And this one
   they call Mountain Girl. Every time she sees Dr. George Washington Henry,
   who is after all one of our most distinguished Negro ministers and
   thinkers, she yells out, "Watermelon Henry!"

   -Watermelon Henry?

   -Yes, it seems she saw him eating a watermelon the other day, and
   "enjoying it," as she insists on saying, and so now, every time she sees
   him, she sings out, "Watermelon Henry!" And you know the kind of voice she
   has. I suppose that's "bringing it all out front," or whatever they call
   it-but really-Watermelon Henry-

   The upshot is, they want to throw the whole bunch out. But Sawyer holds
   his ground and says that if Kesey and the Pranksters are expelled, he is
   leaving too. This posed the possibility of a walkout of the Young Turks,
   which might create an even worse schism. So the elders agreed to ride it
   out.

   -We think you're making a mistake, Paul, Kesey is manipulating this
   conference.

   KESEY WAS, IN FACT, NOW TREMENDOUSLY INTERESTED IN THE whole phenomenon
   of. . . Control. He had discovered that the Pranksters had been able to
   control the flow of the conference, not by any Machiavellian planning, but
   simply by drawing the conference into their movie. The conference was on a
   schedule, but the Pranksters always arrived .. . Now, and in no time at
   all everyone had become a player in their movie. Kesey began to hold daily
   briefings for the Pranksters.

   -From now on, he's saying, we've got to stick to the same costume every
   day. Every Prankster's got to have a clear identity to everybody here, so
   that everywhere you go and they see you, you're on, it turns them on to
   your thing, the thing you're doing.

   Kesey has on the Yin-Yang jacket. Mountain Girl has on the purple robe.
   Babbs has on an incredible pair of pants of many-colored stripes, made by
   Gretch. And so forth.

   Mountain Girl objects.

   -I think we ought to forgit our own identity and the costumes and just do
   our thing and keep it open.

   -That's right, but that won't do any good if they don't have a clear idea
   of what our thing is.

   So they stuck to the costumes and it worked. Hour by hour it became clear
   that the Pranksters were on to a secret of... Control, in each and every
   situation.

   Kesey's sense of timing was perfect. By Friday, Kesey had done a lot of
   talking, on stage, off stage, down by the bus, and things had gotten to
   the point where people might start saying, well, for a guy who says
   talking won't get the job done, he has done an awful lot of talking. Kesey
   emerged from the bus that afternoon with a huge swath of adhesive tape
   plastered across his mouth. He went around the whole day like that,
   silent, plastered over, as if to say, I'm through talking.

   All the kids at Asilomar thought this was great, too. More and more of
   them were hanging around the bus, while the Pranksters flung kelp about
   and played like very children themselves. Nighttime and one girl really
   feels into the thing, and she wants nothing more in this world than to go
   on an acid trip with the Pranksters. She has never taken acid before. So
   they give her some and a group of them take acid, down by the bus, by the
   ocean, and christ, she starts freaking out. She starts wailing away.
   That's all they need. This one thing could wreck everything they've done.
   So Kesey quick says give her total Attention. So they gather around her,
   all the Pranksters, and bathe her in love and Attention and she breaks
   through the freakout, comes through the other side and starts grooving on
   it, and it's beautiful. It's like all the Pranksters' theories and
   professed beliefs have been put to a test in the outside world, away from
   La Honda, and they're working now, and they have ... Control.

   ON THE LAST DAY, SUNDAY, THE KIDS AT THE CONFERENCE PUT on a show,
   apparently a tradition at the conference. But this show is all about the
   Pranksters. They have a kid impersonating practically every Prankster. The
   best one they did was the Hermit, scuttling and sniggling and giggling
   around. But they also did Kesey and Babbs and some others. The grand
   finale of the show was a musical number, "Kelp I Need Somebody!", sung to
   the tune of the Beatles' song "Help!"

   The Sports Shirts looked and endured. They had ridden it out and at least
   they had avoided a schism. Or had they? Hmmm-mmm....

   Paul Sawyer looked at Kesey ... and he saw a prophetic figure. He had not
   taught or preached. Rather, he had created ... an experience, an awareness
   that flashed deeper than cerebration. Somehow he was in the tradition of
   the great prophets. The modern world knows prophets only in the stiff,
   reverent language of the texts and scholarly limnings of various
   religions. Somehow Kesey had created the prophetic aura itself, and
   through the Pranksters many people at the conference had not observed but
   experienced mystic brotherhood, albeit ever so bizarre ... a miracle in
   seven days.

   THE FOLLOWING YEAR THERE WERE TWO CONFERENCES OF THE Unitarian Church.
   One, as always, was at Asilomar. And the Sport Shirts were there, as
   always. The other was in the High Sierras. The Young Turks held their own
   conference, in the High Sierras, up in the thin air. Somehow it wasn't
   quite what they expected, however. A certain psychic decibel level was
   lacking. Nevertheless, the age of bullshit was over. They were on the bus
   for good. The next year Sawyer spent a month living in Haight-Ashbury, to
   explore the possibilities of a new kind of ministry for the young people;
   on the bus, as it were.

   OH, THE VI-BRA-TIONS . . .

   IT SO HAPPENED THAT ONE OF THE FEMALE DELEGATES TO THE Unitarian
   conference at Asilomar had her own little resume of the conference printed
   up, and she mailed it out. The Pranksters read it out loud in the living
   room at Kesey's:

   "So the Prophet Kesey came before us"-and did such and such.

   "And the Prophet Kesey said"-this and that.

   "And the Prophet Kesey made a sign"-signifying Christ knows what.

   "And it was good, for as the Prophet Kesey says"-

   -repeating this phrase, the Prophet Kesey, and adorning it with all the
   biblical rhetoric-only she was serious! straight! rapt! a true believer!
   and probably thought the Prophet Kesey would beam when he saw it.

   So the Pranksters all look at Kesey. He has his head down and he says in a
   melancholy way:

   "We're not on the Christ Trip. That's been done, and it doesn't work. You
   prove your point, and then you have 2,000 years of war. We know where that
   trip goes."

   All the same, it was a sensitive moment. The old girl had tried to put it
   all into so many words-Kesey's role and the whole direction the Pranksters
   were taking. All the Pranksters-we're on some kind of trip, Christ knows.
   They all had religion, all right. It was ... like the whole Prankster
   thing was now building up some kind of conclusion, some ... ascension, and
   no one could give it a right name and still be called sane. A great
   burning column, reaching about the western horizon, perhaps .. .

   Kesey himself was like someone possessed. The goddamn scene here is enough
   to drive anybody off the freaking platter. It's getting like a circus,
   every freak in California now showing up, heads, bums, students, raggy
   little girls come looking for excitement, looking to get spaced out on LSD
   or for Christ knows what reason. Even spades turning up, like Heavy, who
   rises up in the woods in the middle of the night among the tents croaking
   like a bullfrog: Have no worry, have no fear, hash-smokin' Heavy's here.
   ..

   It's even gotten to Babbs, this motley collection. "This is a zoo!" he's
   saying to Kesey. "This is where the love stuff gets you!

   But Kesey says, "When you've got something like we've got, you can't just
   sit on it. You've got to move off of it. You can't just sit on it and
   possess it, you've got to move off of it and give it to other people. It
   only works if you bring other people into it."

   So everybody who wanted could stay, Prankster or not, and the more-who
   gives a shit. Kesey also had his court appearances to contend with and
   more lying, finking, framing, politicking by the constables than a body
   could believe-he looked like he had aged ten years in three months. He was
   now some indeterminate age between thirty and forty. He was taking a lot
   of speed and smoking a lot of grass. He looked haggard, and when he looked
   haggard, his face seemed lopsided. One day he came stumbling out of the
   backhouse and Sandy saw him and one eye seemed to be aimed one way and one
   the other, as if there had been a horrible wrench . .. although the grim
   shit was beginning to hit Sandy again, too ...

   No turning back, man! We're on the space ship now, fly by ... Control...
   and Attention . .. going with the flow and we can't duck the weird shit,
   no matter how weird it is. Kesey was doing some acid rapping, taking 500,
   1,000, 1,500 micrograms instead of the normal 100 to 250. He had always
   been against that. Acid rappers, freaks who made a competition out of who
   could take the most acid-they all seemed to end up loose in the head, that
   breed. But now it was as if no experiment could be left undone.

   One night Kesey took about 1,500 micrograms and several other Pranksters
   took lesser doses and they got down on the floor and started the Humanoid
   Radio. They started babbling, going into echolalia, ululation, all manner
   of nonverbal expression, talking in Tongues, as it were. The idea was to
   try to hit that beam and that mode that would enable you to communicate
   with beings on other planets, other galaxies ... They were all high as
   hell, of course, but one thought shot through the manic dendrite raps like
   a subliminal legend: What if-and you'll never know until you do it if you
   have the

   power! they're sitting around a big round table in kesey's living room. It
   is a big wooden table, now covered with the carved initials and
   inscriptions of Hell's Angels, "Ralph of Oakland," and so on, playing the
   game of Power. Page Browning wins and he orders: Now we all take DMT and
   hold hands, seated in a circle around the table.

   And rrrrrrrrrrush those fantastic neon bubbles rushing up out of the heart
   square into the human squash and bursting into-skull mirrors! out of
   Nipponese kaleidoscope got it down Grant through a door of tesselated
   straw over the carvings of the Hell's Angels on the table here brought
   into The Movie because now, Hondo, on the space craft you can deal with
   anyone just imagine them into The Movie, get so totally into the moment
   that whichever way you move the entire moment moves with you, not causing,
   bub, just flowing-Go with the flow-Go

   Outside

   Kesey hears a voice and it tells him to get up from the table, and he
   does, and there are Page and other Pranksters spaced out of their gourds
   and holding hands and ... keening, with their eyes closed because like
   with DMT opening your eyes doesn't change a thing-those eyelid movies just
   keep on pouring out into the living room and Kesey goes outside in the
   dark in the cool of the redwood dell and now it-

   I am the Ace and Faye is the Red Queen

   Whump?

   in a flash the water heater out back of the house in the dark-meaning-if
   he gestures it will

   BLOW UP

   and he gestures and it is blown up, the heater, demolished, a hell of a
   blast-the voice says

   Go OUT UPON THE MAIN ROAD

   and he goes out over the wooden bridge, out onto Route 84 in the dark with
   only the smallest blowwwwwwnnn glow from the house to be seen, and a wind
   comes up. Weird shit, Major-the wind never comes up in this gorge with all
   these hills and trees around and strange the wind lifts under the thoracic
   box and every convex leaf and the balloon canopy cathedral bowers and now;
   he; is;

   God

   It is crazy and delirious and zonked out and real, with half of the
   mesencephalon saying

   You ARE HIGH

   and the other half saying, Nevertheless

   You are God

   Car coming down the hill from La Honda around the last bend on Route 84,
   the lights swooping over the redwoods

   The enemy

   heading straight for him at 50 miles an hour as he balances tamping the
   earth with his feet on the very center line. No undue cause for alarm and
   concern, however. He has but to

   Gesture

   the car slows down and creeps around him, shuddering in the weird wind,
   trying to hold itself together in the face of

   This surge and he knows with absolute certainty he has... all the Power in
   the world can do what he wants with the Enemy in whatever form-he flings
   out his arm

   Gestures

   the car stops. The enemy peers out. At this point he can do all

   Destroy

   Create

   Galvanize

   Call back

   Send forth

   -has only to decide, with power too great to use and too formidable to
   squander. He walks back over the bridge to the house as the wind dies
   down. The skull mirrors... ring-

   Afterwards he knows it was the drug. And yet-Walker had been driving up
   near Skylonda in that selfsame moment and had suddenly felt a wind rise
   and said, How very strange! Too much!

   Oh yes, Major, it was the drug, you understand-and yet-he was fully into
   the bare Halusion Gulp of the moment out there and there ::::: was the
   Power and the Call and this movie is big enough to include the world, a
   cast of millions, the castoff billions .. . Control Tower to Orbiter One

   Control

                                    chapter

                                       XV

                                     Cloud

   a hulking great sign on the gate out front

                    The Merry Pranksters Welcome the Beatles

   The Beatles were going to be at the Cow Palace outside of San Francisco on
   the evening of September 2. The papers, the radio, the TV could talk of
   nothing else. Kesey's idea, the current fantasy, is that after the show
   the Beatles will come to La Honda for a good freaking rout with the Merry
   Pranksters. Now as to how this is to all come about...

   But one has to admit the sign creates an effect.

                    The Merry Pranksters Welcome the Beatles

   Out on Route 84, Mom&Dad&Buddy&Sis in their Ocelot Rabies 400 hardtop
   sedans, they slow down and stop and stare. The last sign, the one reading
   The Merry Pranksters Welcome the Hell's Angels, for that one they mainly
   just slowed down. After all, it didn't say when. It might be 30 seconds
   from now-hundreds of the beasts, coming 'round the mountain in a shower of
   spirochetes and crab lice, spitting out bone marrow from the last cannibal
   rape job up the road.

   Well, it worked with the Hell's Angels. They put up the sign The Merry
   Pranksters Welcome the Hell's Angels, and sure enough the Angels came,
   these unbelievable bogeymen for the middle class, in the flesh, and they
   became part of the Prankster movie, in the rich ripe cheesy Angel flesh.
   So they put up the sign The Merry Pranksters Welcome the Beatles and maybe
   the Beatles will come. There is this one small difference of course. Kesey
   knew the Hell's Angels. He invited them, face to face. Ah, but comes a
   time to put a few professed beliefs to the test. Control, Attention,
   Imagine the little freaks into the movie ...

   Kesey raps on to Mountain Girl out in the backhouse. They lie there on the
   mattresses, with Kesey rapping on and on and Mountain Girl trying to
   absorb it. Ever since Asilomar, Kesey has been deep into the religion
   thing. Miracles-Control-Now- The Movie-on and on he talks to Mountain Girl
   out in the backhouse and very deep and far-out stuff it is, too. Mountain
   Girl tries to concentrate, but the words swim like great waves of. .. The
   words swim by and she hears the sound but it is like her cerebral cortex
   is tuned out to the content of it. Her mind keeps rolling and spinning
   over another set of data, always the same. Like-the eternal desperate
   calculation. In short, Mountain Girl is pregnant.

   And yet with all this desperation rolling and spinning going on, something
   he says will catch hold. They are that bizarre, but that plausible,
   Kesey's dreams are. It's a matter of imagining them into the movie. The
   Beatles. It is like an experiment in everything the Pranksters have
   learned up to now. We can't make the Beatles come out here to our place.
   We can't cause them to do it in the usual sense. But we can imagine them
   into the movie and work them into the great flow of acausal connection and
   then it will happen of its own accord. This sign starts the movie going,
   The Merry Pranksters Welcome the Beatles, and our movie becomes their
   movie, Mom's and Dad's and Buddy's and Sis's and all the Berkeley kids'
   and all the heads' and proto-heads' of the San Francisco peninsula, until
   our fantasy becomes the Beatles' fantasy ... Wonder when they will first
   feel it... Despite the rolling and spinning and all, Mountain Girl can't
   hardly help but marvel at the current fantasy because there has already
   been so much ... weird shit... that worked. Bringing the Angels in, like
   Kesey did, the most feared demons in America . . . and finding Good People
   like Buzzard and Sonny and Tiny and Frank and Terry the Tramp, who Done
   Well, and Beautiful People like Gut... And the poor tortured intellectual
   angels at Asilomar, from Watermelon Henry to freaking Rachel-for a week
   Kesey had mystified, like mystified, and taken over the whole Unitarian
   Church of California. They would never be the same again, which was just
   as well. A true Miracle, in fact, since they had been the same for so
   goddamn long. Control :::: and it was so plausible, the way it sounded in
   Kesey's certain Oregon drawl. So few humans have the hubris to exert their
   wills upon the flow, maybe not more than forty on the whole planet at any
   given time. The world is flat, it is supported by forty, or maybe four,
   men, one at each corner, like the cosmic turtles and elephants in the
   mythology books, because no one else dares. Mountain Girl is 18 and she is
   pregnant, but this is Kesey ...

   And Miracles? You haven't seen miracles yet, Job, until you see the
   Pranksters draw the Beatles into their movie.

   SEPTEMBER 2. FAYE'S  SEWING MACHINE IS THE FIRST THING everyone hears as
   they wake up. Faye and Gretch pull out the big costume chest, full of all
   sorts of ungainly theatrical shit, swash-buckle swords and plumed hats and
   Errol Flynn dueling shirts and Robin Hood boots and quivers and quail
   masks and Day-Glo roadworker vests and sashes and medals and saris and
   sarongs and shades and beaks and bells and steelworker hard hats and World
   War I aviator helmets and Dr. Strange capes and cutlasses and codpieces
   and jumpsuits and football jerseys and aprons and ascots and wigs and
   warlock rattles and Jungle Jim jodhpurs and Captain Easy epaulets and
   Fearless Four tights-and Merry Prankster Page Browning special face
   paints. The Merry Pranksters are getting ready to head bombed out into the
   mightiest crazed throng in San Francisco history, come to see the Beatles
   at the Cow Palace.

   One of the Pranksters' outer circle, so to speak, a fellow called C--,
   from Palo Alto-C--had worked out some kind of a deal and gotten thirty
   tickets to the Beatles concert for the Pranksters, even though tickets
   were supposed to be impossible to get. C-was one of the Pranksters' acid
   sources. Another was an old guy known as the Mad Chemist, an amateur
   chemistry genius who was also a gun freak. Anyway, this C-- worked out
   some kind of a deal and he also got enough acid for everybody for the
   trip. Just before the Pranksters, inner and outer circle, and kids,
   climbed on the bus, Kesey grinned and passed out the acid. It was in
   capsules, but it was such high concentration it just coated part of the
   inside of the capsules, so it looked like there was nothing in there. The
   Pranksters called it acid gas. So they all took acid gas and got on the
   bus. Cassady was off somewhere, so Babbs drove. Kesey was up on top of the
   bus, directing the movie. Well, it was colorful enough, this movie. The
   bus was super-rigged, all the sound equipment, two big speakers up top,
   records and tapes, plus the whole Prankster band up top of the bus, George
   Walker's drums, and basses and guitars and trombones and plumes spilling
   out the windows and flashes of Day-Glo and flapping epaulets, freaking
   flashing epaulets, and the Beatles album from the movie Help! screaming
   out the speakers, and up on top, Kesey and Sandy, Mountain Girl, Walker,
   Zonker, and a new Prankster, a little girl called Mary Microgram, and
   guitars and drums-He-e-e-elp I ne-e-e-e-ed somebody-the whole flapping
   yahooing carnival of a bus bouncing and jouncing and grinding up over
   Skylonda, Cahill Ridge, and down through Palo Alto and out onto the Harbor
   Freeway heading toward San Francisco, a goddamn rolling circus once again.
   Everybody was getting kind of high on acid, wasted, in fact, and starting,
   one by one, Mountain Girl and Sandy and Norman, who was inside the bus, to
   have that thing where the motion and the roar of the bus and the beat of
   the music and the sound of it are all one thing rolling together, and like
   Babbs is driving to the exact tempo and speed of the Beatles music, since
   they are all one thing together, growing high as baboons down through the
   freaking motels and electric signs and gull lights in Burlingame, near the
   airport, the Hyatt House super-America motel spires aloft-pitching and
   rolling and gunning along in exact time to the Beatles music, that being
   the soundtrack of this movie, you understand-and then off the expressway
   at the Cow Palace exit and down the swerving-ne-e-e-ed some-body-ramp,
   down an incline, down a hill, toward dusk, with the fever millions of cars
   streaming south on the freeway and the sun a low bomb over the hills,
   zonked, in fact. And grinding down to the stop light, thunk, and the
   brakes sound like a cast-iron flute A below high C-and at that very
   moment, that very moment of bus stop-the Beatles song Help! ends, in that
   very moment, and weird music starts, from the part of the movie Help!
   where the Arab is sneaking up behind Ringo, and in that weird moment the
   wind rises over the freeway and to the right there is an abandoned
   factory, all brick and glass, mostly glass, great 1920s factory glass
   panes and all of them bending weird in the wind and flashing sheets of
   that huge afternoon sun like a huge thousand-eyed thing pulsing explosions
   of sunlight in exact time to the weird Arab music- and in that very moment
   Kesey, Mountain Girl, Sandy, Zonker, all of them-no one even has to look
   at another because they not only know that everyone else is seeing it at
   once, they feel, they feel it flowing through one brain, Atman and
   Brahman, all one on the bus and all one with the writhing mass sun
   reflector ripple sun bomb prisms, the bricks, the glass, the whole hulk of
   it, Pranksters and Beatles and sun bombs flashing Arab music- and then in
   that very moment, they all, the all in one, the one brain flow, see the
   mouldering sign silhoutted against the sky above the building:

                                     CLOUD

   Suddenly it seemed like the Pranksters could draw the whole universe into
   ... the movie ...

   AND THEN, CURIOUSLY, BEING AS IT IS, SO FREAKING HIGH OUT here-Mountain
   Girl thinks what the fuck is this. It looks like a slaughterhouse. In
   fact, it is the Cow Palace. She can't even focus on the big hulking
   building itself for the miles and endless rings of slaughterhouse fences
   around it, fences and barbed wire and a million cars jamming in and being
   jammed in in the cold fag end of the dusk. Curiously, it isn't terrifying
   to Mountain Girl, however. It is just a slaughterhouse, that's all.

   But to other Pranksters-a concentration camp. We're going to jail, for the
   rest of our lives only. Everybody scrambling down off the bus, all still
   in motion with the ground and the concentration-camp fences flailing in
   the gruesome gloaming while billions of teeny freaks rush by them,
   screaming and freaking. They have their tickets in their hand like it is
   the last corner of salvation extant but they can't even read the mothers.
   They are wasted. The letters on the ticket curdle and freak off into the
   teeny freak flow. Thirty Pranksters in full flapping epaulets and plumes
   desperately staring at the minute disappearing tickets in their hands in
   the barby ante-pens of the concentration camp. They are going to arrest us
   and lock us away for the rest of our lives. That seems very certain,
   almost like well, that's why we came. Thirty acid heads, with innocent
   children in tow, in full Prankster regalia, bombed out of their gourds on
   the dread LSD, veering, careening in delirium sun pulse. In public, stoned
   out of their skulls on LSD, not only in public but in this momentous
   heaving Beatles throng amid 2,000 red dog forensic cops, in full
   go-to-hell costume-exterminate the monsters-

   ... but... no one lays a hand on them or says the first word, thousands of
   cops and not even one hassle ... because we're too obvious. Suddenly it
   couldn't be clearer to Norman. We're too obvious and we've blown their
   brains. They can't focus on us- or-we've sucked them into the movie and
   dissolved the bastids-

   Inside the Cow Palace it is very roaring hell. Somehow Kesey and Babbs
   lead the Day-Glo crazies up to their seats. The Pranksters are sitting in
   a great clump, a wacky perch up high in precipitous pitch high up pitching
   down to the stage and millions of the screaming teeny freaks. The teeny
   freaks, tens of thousands of little girls, have gone raving mad already,
   even though the Beatles have not come on. Other groups, preliminaries,
   keep trooping on, And now-Martha and the Vandellas and the electrified
   throb and brang vibrates up your aorta and picks your bones like a sonic
   cleaner, and the teeny freaks scream-great sheets of scream like sheets of
   rain in a squall-and kheew, Xheew, pow, pow, pow-how very marvelous, how
   very clever, figures Norman. From up out of the Cow Palace horde of sheet
   scream teeny freaks comes this very marvelous clever light display,
   hundreds of exploding lights throughout the high intensity lights,
   ricocheting off everything, what a marvelous clever thing they've rigged
   up here for our ...

   -Mountain Girl smiles... the incredible exploding lights explode out in
   front of her, a great sea of them, and then they explode on her retina in
   great sunburst retinal sulphur rockets, images and after-images that she
   will never forget as long as she lives, in truth-

   ... for our entertainment, and it is twenty or thirty minutes before
   Norman, stoned, realizes that they are flashbulbs, hundreds, thousands of
   teeny freaks with flashbulb cameras, aimed at the stage or just shot off
   in optic orgasm. Sheets of screams, rock 'n' roll, blam blam, a sea of
   flashbulbs-perfect madness, of course.

   -Mountain Girl grins and takes it all in-

   Other Pranksters, stoned, are slowly getting up tight, however, including
   Kesey and Babbs. The vibrations are very bad, a poison madness in the air-

   Each group of musicians that goes off the stage-the horde thinks now the
   Beatles, but the Beatles don't come, some other group appears, and the sea
   of girls gets more and more intense and impatient and the screaming gets
   higher, and the thought slips into Norman's flailing flash-frayed brain
   stem ::: the human lung cannot go beyond this :::: and yet when the voice
   says And now-the Beatles-what else could he say?-and out they come on
   stage-them-John and George and Ringo and uh the other one-it might as well
   have been four imported vinyl dolls for all it was going to matter-that
   sound he thinks cannot get higher, it doubles, his eardrums ring like
   stamped metal with it and suddenly Ghhhhhhwooooooooowwwwww, it is like the
   whole thing has snapped, and the whole front section of the arena becomes
   a writhing, seething !mass of little girls waving their arms in the air,
   this mass of pink arms, it is all you can see, it is like a single
   colonial animal with a thousand waving pink tentacles-it is a single
   colonial animal with a thousand waving pink tentacles,

   -vibrating poison madness and filling the universe with the teeny agony
   torn out of them. It dawns on Kesey: it is one being. They have all been
   transformed into one being.

   -Mountain Girl grins and urges them on-its scream does not subside for a
   moment, during after or between numbers, the Beatles could be miming it
   for all it matters. But something else ... does. .. matter ... and Kesey
   sees it. One of the Beatles, John, George, Paul, dips his long electric
   guitar handle in one direction and the whole teeny horde ripples precisely
   along the line of energy he set off-and then in the other direction,
   precisely along that line. It causes them to grin, John and Paul and
   George and Ringo, rippling the poor huge freaked teeny beast this way and
   that-

   Control-it is perfectly obvious-they have brought this whole mass of human
   beings to the point where they are one, out of their skulls, one psyche,
   and they have utter control over them-but they don't know what in the hell
   to do with it, they haven't the first idea, and they will lose it. In
   Kesey the vibration is an awful anticipation of the snap-

   Ghhhhhwooooooooowwwww, thousands of teeny bodies hurtling toward the stage
   and a fence there and a solid line of cops, fighting to hurl the assault
   back, while the Beatles keep moving their chops and switching their hips
   around sunk like a dumb show under the universal scream. In that surge,
   just when you would have thought not another sound in the universe could
   break through, it starts-thwaaaac\-thwaaaac\-the sound of the folding
   chairs on the arena floor collapsing and smashing down on the floor, and
   the remains are down there amid the pink tentacles, crushed to a pulp,
   little bits and splinters that used to be folding chairs, debris being
   passed out from hand to hand traveling over the pink tentacles from one to
   the other like some hideously diseased lurching monster cockroaches. And
   then the girls start fainting, like suffocation, and getting tromped on,
   and they start handing out their bodies, cockroach chair debris and the
   bodies of little teeny freaks being shuttled out over the pitched sea like
   squashed lice picked off the beast, screaming and fainting and
   Ghhhhhwooooowwwwww again up against the cop fence while the Beatles cheese
   and mince at them in the dumb show, utterly helpless to ripple them or
   anything else now, with no control left-

   Cancer-Kesey has only to look and it is perfectly obvious-all of them, the
   teeny freaks and the Beatles, are one creature, caught in a state of sheer
   poison mad cancer. The Beatles are the creature's head. The teeny freaks
   are the body. But the head has lost control of the body and the body
   rebels and goes amok and that is what cancer is. The vibrations of it hit
   the Pranksters, in a clump, stoned out of their gourds, in sickening
   waves. Kesey-Babbs-they all feel it at once, and Norman.

   -Mountain Girl looks very surprised. She wants to see the rest of it. But
   Kesey and Babbs have decided they should all leave-before the Monster Snap
   occurs, the big cancer wrap-up of the whole process.

   -Wait a minute, says Mountain Girl.

   But the Pranksters get up in a clump and a rustle of plumes and epaulets
   and Day-Glo, zonked out of their heads on acid, and all sorts of people
   start getting up-but like, concrete. The more headway they make toward the
   exits, the more it becomes a claustrophobia of pens, an endless series of
   pens. They head down long corridors, all concrete, and already hundreds
   are jammed in the corridors, all looking kind of raggy-because- They get
   the total vibration from them-everybody has the one same feeling: suppose
   this thing snaps now and there is panic and everybody makes a rush for it,
   the exit, but there is no exit, only concrete walls and concrete ceilings
   weighing down like a thousand tons and ramps-toward nothing-leading
   down-then up in a great clump of hump-and then down, outside, there is the
   sky, but it is black, it is nighttime by now and sick ochre floodlights,
   but they have merely made it to another pen, more Cyclone fences and
   barbed wire with frantic raggy people-all fleeing-milling around in it
   like rats, trying to get to the exit, which is a turnstile, an upright
   turnstile with bars, like an iron maiden, and you have to get inside of
   it, totally, one person at a time, with a frantic crush on both sides, and
   even then you have only made it to another pen, a parking lot, with more
   Cyclone fence and barbed wire and now teeny freaks and cars crushed in
   here, all trying to get out, seven and eight cars at a whack trying to
   nose through an opening big enough for one. Cages, cages, cages and no end
   to it. Even out there, beyond, where cars have escaped and they are in a
   line with their lights on-trapped by the hills, which are another great
   pen trapping the whole place in ... in ... The Pranksters all silent and
   numb with the apprehension of the Great Cancer Snap to come-

   -Except that Mountain Girl says Wait a minute-

   -and Zonker, with his huge euphoric Zonker grin on, fraternizing madly
   with all teeny freaks as they stream out, saying to all who listen: "The
   Beatles are going to Kesey's when they leave here . . . the Beatles are
   going to Kesey's . . ." and the word spreads among the crowd in the most
   delirious way-

   Kesey plunges back in for survivors. See if there are any Pranksters
   trapped inside. He tells the rest to go to the bus and stay there, and he
   plunges in. The Pranksters touch the bus and their morale revives a bit.
   They rev up the amplifiers and the speakers and climb up on top in their
   crazy costumes and start idling over the drums and the electric guitars.
   The thousands of little raggy girls keep pouring out into the parking lot,
   still wound up like a motorcycle and no release and of course they see the
   bus and these strange Day-Glo people. One group of kids is protesting that
   the music business is rigged and they're carrying placards and screaming
   and they figure the Pranksters support them-the Pranksters grin and wave
   back-everybody figures the strange Day-Glo people are for whatever they're
   for. They start piling around the bus, these little teeny freaks, and
   start pelting it with jelly beans, the hard kind, the kind they brought to
   throw at the Beatles. The Pranksters sit on top of the bus with the jelly
   beans clattering off the side and the flaming little teeny freaks pressed
   around screaming-So this is what the Beatles feel, this mindless amok
   energy surging at them for-what?

   At last Kesey returns with the last to be rescued, Mary Microgram, looking
   like a countryside after a long and fierce war, and Kesey says let's haul
   ass out of here. Babbs starts the bus up and they pull out, bulling their
   way slowly out toward freedom.

   Cancer! We saw it. It was there. Bad vibrations, say all. Endless cages.
   They all rock and sway, stoned on acid.

   "Hell," thinks Mountain Girl. "I have to come here with a bunch of old men
   who never saw a rock 'n' roll show before."

   ON THE WAY BACK THEY PUT THE BEATLES TAPE ON AGAIN, from Help! but it was
   no use. They were all too dispirited. Except for Mountain Girl and Zonker.
   Mountain Girl said she'd wanted to stay and see the rest of the show.
   Well-what the hell. Zonker was smiling about the Beatles coming. Well-that
   was what he had told the whole world anyway. And where the hell else would
   they go from there? In fact, the current fantasy-the imminent arrival of
   the Beatles-had hardly crossed anybody's mind for the last hour, not even
   Kesey's. Get the hell out of there, that was the main thing. Where were
   the Beatles? Who the hell knew. The little vinyl dolls had probably
   cheesed and minced off into a time warp. ... In any case, it wasn't very
   hulking likely they were coming to La Honda.

   Finally the bus comes grinding around the last curve round the mountain,
   up to Kesey's place, and the bus noses across the bridge and the
   headlights hit the yard-and the sight is gruesome and comical at the same
   time. It is like a super version of the nightmare of the man who just
   wants to go home and go to bed. The Pranksters have guests. In fact, they
   have three or four hundred guests. They are all jammed into the big yard
   between the main house and the backhouse, with big bitter lollipop eyes.
   It's like every head, freak, boho, and weirdo in the West has assembled in
   one spot, the first freakout, with a couple of hundred teeny freaks thrown
   in for good measure. Half of them are hunkered down with their big
   lollipop eyes turned up like somebody spit them up against the house and
   they slid down to the ground like slugs. Naturally they all came for the
   big beano with the Beatles. The party. Zonker did his work in the highest
   Prankster tradition. The sign still hangs on the gate:

                    The Merry Pranksters Welcome the Beatles

   Kesey is not in the mood for a goddamned thing and heads into the house.
   The whole head-freak-boho-slug mob stares at him, all these lollipop eyes,
   as if he is going to produce the Beatles from out of a sleeve. Then they
   start grumbling, like a bunch of prisoners who haven't been fed but don't
   know whether this is the time for the slave revolt or not. It is a
   debacle, except that it is so damned comical. The look on their faces.
   That, and the appearance of Owsley.

   A COCKY LITTLE GUY, SHORT, WITH DARK HAIR, DRESSED LIKE an acid head, the
   usual boho gear, but with a strange wound-up nasal voice, like a head with
   the instincts of a roller-skating rink promoter-this little character
   materializes in front of Kesey from out of the boho-slub multitudes and
   announces:

   "I'm Owsley."

   Kesey doesn't say Hi, I'm Kesey. He just looks at him, as if to say, all
   right, you're Owsley and you're here-and then what?

   Owsley looks stunned-I'm Owsley. In fact, Kesey never heard of him. It was
   like, if Owsley suddenly found himself in a place where nobody ever heard
   of him, he didn't know what to do. He and Kesey are just standing there
   trading eyeballs until finally Owsley produces a little bag he has and
   opens it and it is full of capsules of acid. He's Owsley, the greatest LSD
   manufacturer in the world, which turns out to be just about right, the
   Sandoz Chemical Corporation included.

   Mountain Girl looks and just smiles. Everything gets funnier and funnier
   on the Beatles patrol ! He's got his little bag of acid. Mountain Girl
   figures him for a wiseacre right away. Kesey looks at the bagful of acid.
   One thing the little wiseacre's got is acid.

   The world's greatest acid manufacturer, bar none, standing out in the dark
   in the middle of nowhere amid the boho-slug multitudes under the shadowy
   redwoods.

   By and by they had most of the boho-slubs off the place and sliding up the
   highway in the dark looking for christ knows what, seeing as how the
   Beatles never made it. Kesey and Owsley and the Pranksters sat down around
   a fire out by the big stump. And who the hell shows up but the Mad
   Chemist. He and Owsley start sniffing and eyeing each other. It's like the
   slick sharp young neurological doctor genius from out of the Mayo Clinic
   face to face with the old blowsy homey country doctor-on the most puzzling
   and difficult case in the history of medicine. Owsley and the Mad Chemist
   start arguing over drugs. It's like a debate. All of the Pranksters, even
   Kesey, keep out of it and the two of them start hammering away. Let the
   little wiseacre have it, Mad Chemist, Mountain Girl keeps thinking and
   most of the Pranksters feel the same way. But Owsley, the little wiseacre,
   is tearing him up. Owsley is young and sharp and quick and the Mad
   Chemist-the Mad Chemist is an old man and he has taken too much dope. He's
   loose in the head. He tries to argue and his brains all run together like
   goo. Owsley, the Pranksters figure-well, maybe he never even took acid
   himself. Or maybe he took it once. It is just something they sense. And
   the poor old Mad Chemist, he has taken so much dope-caressing his guns and
   hooking down dope-he is loose in the head, and Owsley just tears him up.
   The Mad Chemist is getting crushed. The Mad Chemist never came around
   again but once or twice, it was all so humiliating. So the Pranksters had
   this little wiseacre Owsley on their hands whether they liked it or not.
   But he did make righteous acid and he had money. Between the two of them,
   Owsley and the Pranksters, they were about to put LSD all over the face of
   the globe.

   Little by little, Owsley's history seeped out. He was 30 years old,
   although he looked younger, and he had a huge sonorous name: Augustus
   Owsley Stanley III. His grandfather was a United States Senator from
   Kentucky. Owsley apparently had had a somewhat hungup time as a boy, going
   from prep school to prep school and then to a public high school, dropping
   out of that, but getting into the University of Virginia School of
   Engineering, apparently because of his flair for sciences, then dropping
   out of that. He finally wound up enrolling in the University of
   California, in Berkley, where he hooked up with a hip, good-looking
   chemistry major named Melissa. They dropped out of the University and
   Owsley set up his first acid factory at 1647 Virginia Street, Berkeley. He
   was doing a huge business when he got raided on February 21, 1965. He got
   off, however, because there was no law against making, taking, or having
   LSD in California until October 1966. He moved his operation to Los
   Angeles, 2205 Lafler Road, called himself the Baer Research Group, and
   paid out $20,000 in $100 bills to the Cycle Chemical Corporation for 500
   grams of lysergic acid monohydrate, the basic material in LSD, which he
   could convert into 1.5 million doses of LSD at from $1 to $2 apiece
   wholesale. He bought another 300 grams from International Chemical and
   Nuclear Corporation. His first big shipment arrived March 30, 1965.

   He had a flair, this Owsley. By and by he had turned out several million
   doses of LSD, in capsules and tablets. They had various whimsical emblems
   on them, to indicate the strength. The most famous, among the heads, were
   the "Owsley blues"-with a picture of Batman on them, 500 micrograms worth
   of Superhero inside your skull. The heads rapped over Owsley blues like
   old juice heads drawling over that famous onetime brand from Owsley's
   Virginia home territory, Fairfax County Bourbon, bottled in bond. Owsley
   makes righteous acid, said the heads. Personally he wasn't winning any
   popularity contests with the heads or the cops, either. He is, like,
   arrogant; he is a wiseacre; but the arrogant little wiseacre makes
   righteous acid.

   In fact, Owsley's acid was famous internationally. When the acid scene
   spread to England in late 1966 and 1967, the hippest intelligence one
   could pass around was that one was in possession of "Owsley acid." In the
   acid world, this was bottled-in-bond; certified; guaranteed; and high
   status. It was in this head world that the ... Beatles first took LSD.
   Now, just to get ahead of the story a bit-after Owsley hooked up with
   Kesey and the Pranksters, he began a musical group called the Grateful
   Dead. Through the Dead's experience with the Pranksters was born the sound
   known as "acid rock." And it was that sound that the Beatles picked up on,
   after they started taking acid, to do a famous series of acid-rock record
   albums, Revolver, Rubber Soul, and Sergeant Pepper's Lonely Hearts' Club
   Band. Early in 1967 the Beatles got a fabulous idea. They got hold of a
   huge school bus and piled into it with thirty-nine friends and drove and
   wove across the British countryside, zonked out of their gourds. They were
   going to ... make a movie. Not an ordinary movie, but a totally
   spontaneous movie, using hand-held cameras, shooting the experience as it
   happened-off the top of the head!-cavorting, rapping on, soaring in the
   moment, visionary chaos-a daydream! a black art! a chaos! They finished up
   with miles and miles of film, a monster, a veritable morass of it, all
   shaky and out of focus-blissful Zonk!-which they saw as a total
   breakthrough in terms of expression but also as a commercial display-shown
   on British TV it was-that might be appreciated even outside the esoteric
   world of the heads-

                                   The Movie

   -called Magical Mystery Tour. And . . . the great banner rippled on the
   Prankster gate in the nighttime in ripples and intergalactic billows of
   great howling owsley electro-mad-chemical synchronicity...

                              The Merry Pranksters

                              Welcome the Beatles

                                    chapter

                                      XVI

                              The Frozen Jug Band

   SYNCHRONICITY SPOKEN HERE!

   -and the Pranksters sit around Kesey's living room at night, grooving on
   many strange events. Like the day of the great Blackout in New York City,
   the great power failure that knocked out subways, elevators, lights, air
   conditioners, TVs, clocks, buildings and the rest of the hulks in the
   great cancer capital of the East. The Pranksters grooved over the
   cataclysm and grokked it. Such consternation in the cancer capital! A huge
   surge of electricity had suddenly rolled through the wires and freaking
   blown everything. The utility companies didn't know what had caused this
   surge, but bygod they had experts working on it and they would figure it
   out and such a surge would never occur again.

   A  surge, Mahavira?-

   Meanwhile, there was one story in the newspapers that the Pranksters
   grooved on most truly. It seems that some kid had been playing hooky from
   school in New York that day and had

   gone off to the movies finally and come out of the movie house about 5:15
   p.m. and started walking home, feeling guilty already, and he picked up a
   stick out of the gutter and he started whacking parking meters with it.
   When he got to the corner, he whacked the big utility pole there and

   IN THAT VERY MOMENT

   all the lights in New York went out

   NOW

   and the kid ran home in the dark, crying, confessing all to his mother- I
   did it, I did it, but I didn't mean to-

   And Kesey and the Pranksters did groove on that. The kid was right, that
   was the funny part. Or at least as right as the utility companies. For no
   doubt there was a great surge, friends, and it came through that kid just
   like it came through everything and every being that existed in that
   moment. Just as Severn Darden blew out the candles on his birthday cake in
   that very moment-and they poked through every Con Ed transformer in the
   system and they never did find the cause.

   Cosmo!

   -and once you find out about Cosmo, you know he's running the show. . .
   It's like we're strands of wire intertwined in a great cable that runs
   through a slot, the Pranksters, the Beatles, the Vietnam Day Committee-the
   Vietnam Day Committee?-running through a slot, and all the wires are
   vibrated by Cosmo. Most people lead two-dimensional lives. All they can
   see is the face of the slot, a cross section, so that the wires look like
   a mass of separate little circles looking bigger or smaller according to
   how close you are. They don't-they can't see that these "circles" are just
   cross sections of wires that run backward and forward infinitely and that
   there is a great surge through the whole cable and that anybody who is
   truly into the full bare essence of the thing...

                                                  There is food in the thing.

                                                     My comrades are envious.

                                                     But they cannot harm me.

                                                                Good fortune.

                                                                 -the I Ching

   ... tends to react against political disorder because he is concerned with
   the deep basic religious experience, the deepest sources of life;
   transient politics are insignificant to him.

                                                                -Joachim Wach

   It was against this backdrop, namely, the ultimate and the infinite, that
   an organization known as the Vietnam Day Committee invited Kesey to come
   speak at a huge antiwar rally in Berkeley, on the University of California
   campus. I couldn't tell you what bright fellow thought of that, inviting
   Kesey. Afterwards, they didn't know, either. Or at least none of them
   would own up, despite a lot of interrogations and recriminations and
   general thrashing about. "Who the hell invited this bastard!" was the
   exact wording. A regular little rhubarb they had for themselves. The main
   trouble with the Vietnam Day Committee was that they couldn't see beyond
   the marvelous political whoopee they had cooked up. Why should they? From
   where they were looking in the fall of 1965, they were about to sweep the
   country. Berkeley, the New Left, the Free Speech Movement, Mario Savio,
   the Rebel Generation, the Student Revolution, in which students were going
   to take over the universities, like in Latin America, and drive some fire
   up the clammy rectum of American life-you could read about it in all the
   magazines. And if you don't believe it, come here and watch us, Mr.
   Jones-and so forth.

   They never looked beyond that, as I say, but it might have been no use, in
   any case. Maybe there was no way in the world anybody could have made the
   Vietnam Day Committee realize how their whole beano looked to Kesey and
   the Pranksters. Come rally against the war in Vietnam-from the cosmic
   vantage point the Pranksters had reached, there were so many reasons this
   little charade was pathetic, they didn't know where to begin . . .

   Nevertheless, Kesey was invited, and that was how the fun started.
   Marchers were pouring into Berkeley from seventy-one cities and
   twenty-eight states, for whatever such sums are worth-at any rate,
   thousands of students and professors from all over. There were to be
   teach-ins all day and also an all-day rally starting in the morning, with
   thirty or forty speakers to whip things up, and then at 7:30 in the
   evening, when the fever pitch was reached, they would all rise up off the
   Berkeley campus and march over into Oakland, fifteen or twenty thousand
   souls in a massive line, marching on the Oakland Army Terminal. The
   Oakland Army Terminal was where men and supplies were shipped out to
   Vietnam. Just to spice things up a bit-a large supply of gelignite had
   been stolen, and everybody had visions of Oakland, Berkeley, San
   Francisco, the whole clump, blowing up in a gelignite earthquake of cops,
   peaceniks, Birchers, and probably spades and innocent women and children.
   Nobody had any idea which side had stolen the gelignite, but that only
   made it better.

   The gelignite scare seemed to give Kesey the inspiration for this prank.
   Kesey's saving grace was that he never got serious where he could say it
   just as well with a cosmic joke. Kesey's fantasy for the occasion was to
   come upon the huge anti-war rally as a freaking military invasion. It was
   a true inspiration, this fantasy. They were going to rig up the bus as a
   rolling fortress with guns sticking out and all the Pranksters would dress
   military. Then they would get cars and rig them up the same way, and at
   the head of the whole convoy, there would be-the Hell's Angels, in running
   formation, absolutely adangle with swastikas. Swastikas. If would freaking
   blow their minds, or at least give their cool a test like it never had
   before.

   First they painted the whole bus a dull red color, the color of dried
   blood, in fact. Right on over the greatest riot of Day-Glo design in
   history went this bloody muck. But who gave a damn. Art is not eternal.
   Then they started painting military symbols on the dried blood, swastikas,
   American eagles, Iron Crosses, Viking crosses, Red Crosses, hammers &
   sickles, skulls & bones, anything as long as it looked rank. That very
   night, naturally, the seasonal rains started, and like the Chief said, art
   is not eternal. All the paint started running until it was the most dismal
   mess imaginable. Somehow that was appropriate. The next day, Gut and his
   girlfriend, Little People, showed up. Gut was in a kind of transition
   period, between the Angels and the Pranksters. He had his old Hell's
   Angels sleeveless denim jacket on, but he had taken the insignia off, the
   lettering and the emblem of a skull with a helmet on, but you could see
   where it had all been, because the denim was lighter underneath. It was
   what you might call a goodbye-but-not-forgotten Hell's Angels' jacket.
   Anyway, Gut amazed the Pranksters by painting a big beautiful American
   Eagle on the bus, a little primitive, but strong. The big hulking jesus
   angel had talent. The Pranksters were all pleased as hell. They felt they
   had brought it out of him, somehow. Gut got everybody revved up. They
   built a gun turret on the bus and rigged up two big gray cannons that you
   could maneuver. Norman made a machine gun out of wood and cardboard and
   painted it olive drab. Other people were knocking together wooden guns of
   various ridiculous descriptions. Faye's sewing machine was going.
   Pranksters, inner circle and outer circle, were driving in from all over.
   Lee Quarnstrom, of the outer circle, showed up with a huge supply of Army
   insignia, shoulder patches, arm patches, hashmarks, bars, stars, epaulets.
   Kesey was rigging up the bus with tapes and microphones and amplifiers and
   earphones and electric guitars. Hagen was rigging up his 16-millimeter
   camera and films. Bob Dylan and the Beatles and Joan Baez and Roland Kirk
   and Mississippi John Hunt were droning and clattering over the big
   speakers from over the way atop the dirt cliff. Then Allen Ginsberg turned
   up from Big Sur, with his companion Peter Orlovsky and an entourage of
   pale Chester A. Arthur High School hindus. Ginsberg sang mantras all night
   and jingled bells and finger cymbals. Cassady hooked down speed and worked
   himself up from a standing start, jerking, kicking, dancing-he seemed to
   be moving in time to the sewing machine on a long seam. Ginsberg seemed to
   be chanting in time to a Jainist's whisk broom. Cassady began fibrillating
   the vocal cords, going faster and faster until by dawn if he had gone any
   faster, he would have vibrated off, as old Charles Fort said, and gone
   instantly into the positive absolute. It was a nice weird party.

   The next morning, October 16, the big day-the Pranksters blew the morning,
   naturally, all stroked out in various attitudes from the night before, and
   they were late getting off to Berkeley. Art is not eternal, friends. The
   plan was to meet the Hell's Angels in Palo Alto and go roaring down the
   freeway in formation. They put on Prankster tapes and Cassady got in the
   driver's seat. Everybody climbed on in their crazed military costumes,
   Hassler, Hagen, Babbs, Gretch, Zonker, June the Goon, Roy Seburn, Dale
   Kesey and all sorts of people, even the Mad Chemist-he showed up for this
   one-and Mary Microgram at the last minute. And then Kesey got on. Kesey
   was wearing a big orange coat of the sort highway workers wear so cars
   will see them. He had hash-marks on the sleeves and some kind of floppy
   epaulets flapping on the shoulders. He had a big orange Day-Glo World War
   I helmet on his head. It was so big and came down so far over his forehead
   his eyes were like two little flashlight bulbs under the lid. Kesey got up
   in the gun turret and they were off. Before they got to Palo Alto, in
   Woodside, in fact, the cops stopped them and hassled them and checked them
   over. The Pranksters did the usual, leaped out with cameras and shotgun
   mikes and tape recorders, filming and taping everything the cops said, and
   the cops left, but it ate up time.

   "Aha," said the Mad Chemist, "the first skirmish."

   "The Prankster Alert is out," said Babbs.

   That was just about right. They kept getting stopped and hassled and
   checked over and losing time. They got to the rendezvous in Palo Alto-and
   no Hell's Angels. They waited and waited for the Angels, then gave up and
   took off down the expressway, to Berkeley.

   They didn't get to the Berkeley campus until almost dusk, and their
   arrival didn't make any very momentous impression at first. Now, a full
   phalanx of Hell's Angels, looking like a cross between the Gestapo and the
   Tonton Macoute-that would have been a different story, no doubt. Good and
   noisy, too. But as it was, the bus just pulled into the parking lot by the
   Student Union building and the Pranksters cut up as best they could,
   ack-acking their wooden guns at birds and planes. The big rally had been
   going on all day. They were out on a big lawn, or plaza, on the campus,
   about fifteen thousand of them, the toggle-coat bohemians, while the PA.
   loudspeakers boomed and rabbled and raked across them. There was a big
   platform set up for the speakers. There had been about forty of them, all
   roaring or fulminating or arguing cogently, which was always worse. The
   idea at these things is to keep building up momentum and tension and
   suspense until finally when it is time for action-in this case, the
   march-the signal launches them as one great welded body of believers and
   they are ready to march and take billy clubs upside the head and all the
   rest of it.

   All the shock workers of the tongue were there, speakers like Paul Jacobs,
   and M. S. Arnoni, who wore a prison uniform to the podium because his
   family had been wiped out in a German concentration camp during World War
   II-and out before them was a great sea of students and other Youth, the
   toggle-coat bohemians-toggle coats, Desert Boots, civil rights, down with
   the war in Vietnam-"... could call out to you from their graves or from
   the fields and rivers upon which their ashes were thrown, they would
   implore this generation of Americans not to be silent in the face of the
   genocidal atrocities committed on the people of Vietnam ..." and the words
   rolled in full forensic boom over the PA. systems.

                                     * * *

   THE FIRST PERSON IN THE VIETNAM DAY COMMITTEE CIRCLE to notice Kesey
   approaching the speaker's platform was Paul Krassner, the editor of The
   Realist magazine. Most of the Pranksters were still on the bus, fooling
   around with the guns for the befuddlement of the gawkers who happened by.
   Kesey, Babbs, Gretchen Fetchin and George Walker came on over the
   platform, Kesey in his orange Day-Glo coat and World War I helmet.
   Krassner ran his magazine as pretty much a one-man operation and he knew
   Kesey subscribed to it. So he wasn't so surprised that Kesey knew him.
   What got him was that Kesey just started talking to him, just like they
   had been having a conversation all along and something had interrupted
   them and now they were resuming... It is a weird thing. You feel the guy's
   charisma, to use that one, right away, busting out even through the nutty
   Day-Glo, or maybe sucking one in, the way someone once wrote of Gurdjieff:
   "You could not help being drawn, almost physically, towards him ... like
   being sucked in by a vast, spiritual vacuum cleaner." At the time,
   however, Krassner thought of Flash Gordon.

   "Look up there," Kesey says, motioning up toward the platform.

   Up there is Paul Jacobs. Jacobs tends toward the forensic, anyway, and the
   microphone and loudspeakers do something to a speaker. You can hear your
   voice rolling and thundering, powerful as Wotan, out over that ocean of
   big ears and eager faces, and you are omnipotent and more forensic and
   orotund and thunderous minute by minute-It is written, but I say unto you
   ... the jackals of history-ree-ree-ree-ree ... From where they are
   standing, off to the side of the platform, they can hear very little of
   what Jacobs is actually saying, but they can hear the sound barking and
   roaring and reverberating and they can hear the crowd roaring back and
   baying on cue, and they can see Jacobs, hunched over squat and thick into
   the microphone, with his hands stabbing out for emphasis, and there, at
   sundown, silhouetted against the florid sky, is his jaw, jutting out, like
   a cantaloupe ...

   Kesey says to Krassner: "Don't listen to the words, just the sound, and
   the gestures... who do you see?"

   And suddenly Krassner wants very badly to be right. It is the call of the
   old charisma. He wants to come up with the right answer.

   "Mussolini... ?"

   Kesey starts nodding, Right, right, but keeping his eye on the prognathous
   jaw.

   By this time more of the Pranksters have come up to the platform. They
   have found some electrical outlets and they have run long cords up to the
   platform, for the guitars and basses and horns. Kesey is the next to last
   speaker. He is to be followed by some final Real Barnburner of a speaker
   and then-the final surge and the march on Oakland.

   From the moment Kesey gets up there, it is a freaking jar. His jacket
   glows at dusk, and his helmet. Lined up behind him are more Day-Glo
   crazies, wearing aviator helmets and goggles and flight suits and Army
   tunics, Babbs, Gretch, Walker, Zonker, Mary Microgram, and little Day-Glo
   kids, and half of them carrying electric guitars and horns, mugging and
   moving around in Day-Glo streaks. The next jar is Kesey's voice, it is so
   non-forensic. He comes on soft, in the Oregon drawl, like he's just having
   a conversation with 15,000 people:

   You know, you're not gonna stop this war with this rally, by marching...
   That's what they do... They hold rallies and they march . .. They've been
   having wars for ten thousand years and you're not gonna stop it this way
   ... Ten thousand years, and this is the game they play to do it... holding
   rallies and having marches... and that's the same game you're playing...
   their game ...

   Whereupon he reaches into his great glowing Day-Glo coat and produces a
   harmonica and starts playing it right into the microphone, Home, home on
   the range, hawonking away on the goddamn thing-Home... home ... on the
   ra-a-a-a-ange ha-wonkawonk...

   The crowd stands there in a sudden tender clump, most of them wondering if
   they heard right, cocking their heads and rolling their heads to one
   another. First of all, that conversational tone all of a sudden, and then
   random notes from the Day-Glo crazies behind him ripped out offen the
   electric guitars and the general babble of the place feeding into the
   microphone-did anybody hear right-

   -all the while Kesey is still up there hawonking away on the freaking
   harmonica. Home, home on the ra-a-a-a-a-a-a-ange-

   -ahhhh, that's it-they figure it's some calculated piece of stage
   business, playing Home, home on the range-building up to something like
   Yah! We know about that home! We know about that range! That rotten U.S.
   home and that rotten U.S. range!- -but instead it is the same down-home
   drawling voice- I was just looking at the speaker who was up here before
   me... and I couldn't hear what he was saying... but I could hear the sound
   of it... and I could hear your sound coming back at him ... and I could
   see the gestures-

   -and here Kesey starts parodying Paul Jacobs's stabbing little hands and
   his hunched-over stance and his-

   -and I could see his jaw sticking out like this... silhouetted against the
   sky ... and you know who I saw ... and who I heard?... Mussolini... I saw
   and I heard Mussolini here just a few minutes ago... Yep ... you're
   playing their game...

   Then he starts hawonking away again, hawonking and hawonking Home, home on
   the range with that sad old setter harmonica-around-the-campfire pace-and
   the Pranksters back him up on their instruments, Babbs, Gretch, George,
   Zonker, weaving up there in a great Day-Glo freakout

   -and what the hell-a few boos, but mainly confusion-what in the name of
   God are the ninnies-

   -We've all heard all this and seen all this before, but we keep on doing
   it... I went to see the Beatles last month... And I heard 20,000 girls
   screaming together at the Beatles. .. and I couldn't hear what they were
   screaming, either... But you don't have to ... They're screaming Me! Me!
   Me! Me! ... I'm Me! ... That's the cry of the ego, and that's the cry of
   this rally!... Me! Me! Me! Me!... And that's why wars get fought... ego
   ... because enough people want to scream Pay attention to Me... Yep,
   you're playing their game...

   -and then more hawonkawonkawonkawonkawonka- -and the crowd starts going
   into a slump. It's as if the rally, the whole day, has been one long
   careful inflation of a helium balloon, preparing to take off-and suddenly
   somebody has pulled the plug. It's not what he is saying, either. It's the
   sound and the freaking sight and that goddamn mournful harmonica and that
   stupid Chinese music by the freaks standing up behind him. It's the only
   thing the martial spirit can't stand-a put-on, a prank, a shuck, a goose
   in the anus.

   -Vietnam Day Committee seethe together at the edge of the platform: "Who
   the hell invited this bastard!" "You invited him!" "Well, hell, we figured
   he's a writer, so he'll be against the war!" "Didn't you have enough
   speakers?" says Krassner. "You need all the big names you can get, to get
   the crowd out." "Well, that's what you get for being celebrity fuckers,"
   says Krassner. If they had had one of those big hooks like they had on
   amateur night in the vaudeville days, they would have pulled Kesey off the
   podium right then. Well, then, why doesn't somebody just go up there and
   edge him off! He's ruining the goddamn thing. But then they see all the
   Day-Glo crazies, men and women and children all weaving and electrified,
   clawing at guitars, blowing horns, all crazed aglow at sundown ... And the
   picture of the greatest anti-war rally in the history of America ending in
   a Day-Glo brawl to the tune of Home, home on the range ...

   -suddenly the hawonking on the freaking harmonica stops. Kesey leans into
   the microphone-

   There's only one thing to do . .. there's only one thing's gonna do any
   good at all... And that's everybody just look at it, look at the war, and
   turn your backs and say ... Fuck it...

   -hawonkawonkawonkawonka-

   -They hear that all right. The sound of the phrase-Fuck it-sounds so
   weird, so shocking, even here in Free Speech citadel, just coming out that
   way over a public loudspeaker, rolling over the heads of 15,000 souls-

   -Home, home on the range hawonkawonkawonka, and the Pranksters beginning
   to build up most madly on their instruments now, behind the harmonica,
   sounding like an insane honky-tonk version of Juan Carrillo who devised 96
   tones on the back seat of a Willys Jeep, saved pennies all through the war
   to buy it, you understand, zinc pennies until the blue pustules formed
   under his zither finger nether there, you understand .. .

   -Just look at it and turn away and say ... Fuck it

   -say ... Fuck it ...

   hawonkawonkawonka blam

   -Fuck it-

   Hawonkafuckit. . .friends . . .

   THERE WAS NO WAY ONE COULD PROVE KESEY HAD DONE IT. Nevertheless,
   something was gone out of the anti-war rally. The Real Barnburner spoke,
   and the Vietnam Day Committee tried to put in one last massive infusion of
   the old spirit and then gave the signal and the great march on Oakland
   began, through the gloaming. Fifteen thousand souls ... shoulder to
   shoulder like in the old strike posters. At the Oakland-Berkeley line
   there was an arrow-shaped phalanx of police and National Guard. The
   Vietnam Day Committee marched in frantic clump at the head, trying to
   decide whether to force the issue, have a physical confrontation, heads
   busted, bayonets-or turn back when they ordered them to. Nobody seemed to
   have any resolve. Somebody would say, We have no choice, we've got to turn
   back-and somebody else would call him a Martin Luther King. That was about
   the worst thing you could call anybody on the New Left at that time.
   Martin Luther King turned back at the critical moment on the bridge at
   Selma. We can't risk submitting the crania of our devoted people to
   fracturization and degradation by those who do not shrink from a cowardly
   show of weaponry, he had said, going on like Social Science Negro in his
   sepulchral voice-the big solemn preachery Uncle Tom. Yah! yuh
   Tuskegee-headed Uncle Tom, yuh, yuh Booker T Washington peanut-butter
   lecture-podium Nobel Prize medal head, yuh-Uncle Tom-by the time it was
   all over, Martin Luther King was a stupid music-hall Handkerchief Head on
   the New Left-and here they were, calling each other Martin Luther Kings
   and other incredible things-but nobody had any good smashing iron zeal to
   carry the day-O where is our Zea-lot, who Day-glowed and fucked up our
   heads-and there was nothing to do but grouse at the National Guard and
   turn back, which they did. What the hell has happened to us? Who did this?
   Why, it was the Masked Man-

   So the huge march turned around and headed for Civic Center Park in
   Berkeley and stood around there eating hamburgers and listening to music
   by a jug band-a group that later became known as Country Joe and the
   Fish-and wondering what the hell had happened. Then somebody started
   throwing tear gas from a rooftop and Bob Scheer was bravely telling
   everybody to lie down on the grass, because tear gas rises-but the jug
   band just stood there, petrified, with their hands and their instruments
   frozen in the same position as when the gas hit. It seems the jug band was
   high on something or other, and when the gas hit, the combination of the
   gas and whatever they were already up on-it petrified  them and they stood
   there in stark stiff medias res as if they were posing for an Iwo Jima
   sculpture for the biggest antiwar rally in the history of the American
   people. The whole rally now seemed like a big half ass, with the frozen
   jug band the picture of how far they had gotten.

                                    chapter

                                      XVII

                                   Departures

                               Prepare for Mexico

   And then Kesey posted cryptic words on his log-house Prankster bulletin
   board:

   Let every thought, our whole direction, prepare for Mexico.

   Every morsel you eat, every book you read, every high, every

   low, every Day-Glo deed ...

   But he never said why or when they might expect to go.

                     Mountain Girl Returns to Poughkeepsie

   Now, Mountain Girl groks fully of the Pranksters' psychic takeoff

   And is the very radiometer of their superpsychic pace.

   No one ever plunged more fully in the psychedelic risk-all

   Or ever blazed more radiant through the splays of inner space.

   Yet not even a very Isis is immune against the crisis

   That stamps a woman's psyche when she is going to bear a child.

   It could never be easy to be three thousand miles from Kesey

   But she had to Stop!

   And try to grok

   more fully . .. and go back East awhile

                           Sandy Returns to New York

   The path was soft as velvet, but Sandy heard it coming-

   Ahor! rising, materializing from the mists of his devotion.

   The demon Speed starts wrenching, leaves Sandy flinching in a bummer,

   Dazed again in a half-crazed demonic DMT implosion

   Causing psychosomatic, psychocidic cortical syndromes,

   Even synarthrotic paralysis down the side of his lean face.

   He tries to cure himself, purify the psychic venom,

   But they're no use-all the Prankster arts of this limelit magic place.

   Even I Ching says brain scans, EEGs, the whole clinical bit,

   Which costs money-Kesey! Let me pawn the Ampex,

   Four-hundred-dollar tape machine, for after all I brought it

   Here in the first place-and then-stuck in his synarthrotic cortex

   This thought: Kesey refused him the Ampex, Prankster salvation machine.

   He goes back East for the clinical bit, but that won't be the end of it,
   Dream Warrior ...

                                    chapter

                                     XVIII

                               Cosmo's Tasmanian

                                    Deviltry

   "CAN

   YOU

   PASS THE

   ACID TEST?-"

   Comes the call

   Chiseled on each Prankster eyeball in Lincoln gothic

   As we moan

   In this graveyard among moonstone tombstones with a philosophic

   It's your ass-

   Can you pass the Acid Test?

   Babbs and Kesey swaying

   In a California graveyard, baying deep

   In the synch

   Zonked on LSD on the brink

   freaking steep

   Of a missionary quest:

   Can you pass the Acid Test?

   Tombstones!

   Vaults, coffins and bald carbon-dated bones

   A dream transfusion

   From the Community Breast:

   Can you pass the Acid Test?

   The group mind

   Flying high, Major, but not blind

   in the moonshine

   Was inspired

   With the ceremony that would be required

   in the moon shot

   To extend

   The Prankster message to the ends

   Of the earth. A mindfest:

   a moon ship

   The Acid Test...

   ... and Kesey emerged from the weird night in the graveyard with the
   vision of turning on the world, literally, and a weirdly practical way of
   doing it, known as

   The Acid Test

   For, as it has been written:... he develops a strong urge to extend the
   message to all people ... he develops a ritus, often involving music,
   dance, liturgy, sacrifice, to achieve an objectified and stereotyped
   expression of the original spontaneous religious experience.

   Christ! how many movements before them had run into this selfsame problem.
   Every vision, every insight of the ... original ... circle always came out
   of the new experience... the kairos.. . and how to tell it! How to get it
   across to the multitudes who have never had this experience themselves?
   You couldn't put it into words. You had to create conditions in which they
   would feel an approximation of that feeling, the sublime pairos. You had
   to put them into ecstasy... Buddhist monks immersing themselves in cosmic
   love through fasting and contemplation, Hindus zonked out in Bhakti, which
   is fervent love in the possession of God, ecstatics flooding themselves
   with Krishna through sexual orgies or plunging into the dinners of the
   Bacchanalia, Christians off in Edge City through gnostic onanism or the
   Heart of Jesus or the Child Jesus with its running sore-or-

   The Acid Tests

   And suddenly Kesey sees that they, the Pranksers, already have the
   expertise and the machinery to create a mindblown state such as the world
   has never seen, totally wound up, lit up, amplified and . . .
   controlled-plus the most efficient key ever devised to open the doors in
   the mind of the world: namely, Owsley's LSD.

   For months Kesey has been trying to work out... the fantasy ... of the
   Dome. This was going to be a great geodesic dome on top of a cylindrical
   shaft. It would look like a great mushroom. Many levels. People would
   climb a stairway up the cylinder-buy a ticket?-we-e-e-elllll-and the dome
   would have a great foam-rubber floor they could lie down on. Sunk down in
   the foam rubber, below floor level, would be movie projectors, video-tape
   projectors, light projectors. All over the place, up in the dome,
   everywhere, would be speakers, microphones, tape machines, live, replay,
   variable lag. People could take LSD or speed or smoke grass and lie back
   and experience what they would, enclosed and submerged in a planet of
   lights and sounds such as the universe never knew. Lights, movies, video
   tapes, video tapes of themselves, flashing and swirling over the dome from
   the beams of searchlights rising from the floor from between their bodies.
   The sounds roiling around in the globe like a typhoon. Movies and tapes of
   the past, tapes and video tapes, broadcasts and pictures of the present,
   tapes and humanoid sounds of the future-but all brought together now-here
   and now-Kairos-into the dilated cerebral cortex ...

   The geodesic dome, of course, was Buckminster Fuller's inspiration. The
   light projections were chiefly Gerd Stern's, Gerd Stern of the USCO group,
   although Roy Seburn had already done a lot with them and Page Browning
   showed a talent that surprised everybody. But the magic dome, the new
   planet, was Kesey and the Pranksters. The idea went beyond what would
   later be known as mixed-media entertainment, now a standard practice in
   "psychedelic discotheques" and so forth. The Pranksters had the
   supra-medium, a fourth dimension-acid- Cosmo-All-one-Control-The-Movie-

   But why a dome? The answer to all the Prankster fantasies, public and
   private, the whole solution-they already found it; namely, the Hell's
   Angels party. That two-day rout hadn't been a party but a show. It had
   been more than a show even. It had been an incredible concentration of
   energy. Not only Pranksters, but people from all over, heads, non-heads,
   intellectuals, curiosity-seekers, even cops, had turned up and gotten
   swept up in the incredible energy of the thing. They had been in the
   Prankster movie. It was one show that hadn't been separated into
   entertainers and customers, with the customers buying a ticket and saying
   All right, now entertain me. At the Angels' party everybody got high
   together and everybody did his thing and entertained everybody else,
   Angels being Angels, Ginsberg being Ginsberg, Pranksters being Pranksters,
   and cops being cops. Even the cops did their thing, splashing those big
   lush evil revolving red turret lights off the dirt cliff and growling and
   baying and hassling cars.

                                      CAN

                                      YOU

                                    PASS THE

                                   ACID TEST?

   Anybody who could take LSD for the first time and go through all that
   without freaking out.. . Leary and Alpert preached "set and setting."
   Everything in taking LSD, in having a fruitful, freakout-free LSD
   experience, depended on set and setting. You should take it in some serene
   and attractive setting, a house or apartment decorated with objects of the
   honest sort, Turkoman tapestries, Greek goatskin rugs, Cost Plus blue
   jugs, soft light-not Japanese paper globe light, however, but untasselated
   Chinese textile shades-in short, an Uptown Bohemian country retreat of the
   $60,000-a-year sort, ideally, with Mozart's Requiem issuing with
   liturgical solemnity from the hi-fi. The "set" was the set of your mind.
   You should prepare for the experience by meditating upon the state of your
   being and deciding what you hope to discover or achieve on this voyage
   into the self. You should also have a guide who has taken LSD himself and
   is familiar with the various stages of the experience and whom you know
   and trust... and Fuck that! That only clamped the constipation of the
   past, the eternal lags, on something that should happen Now. Let the
   setting be as unserene and lurid as the Prankster arts can make it and let
   your set be only what is on your. . . brain, man, and let your guide, your
   trusty hand-holding, head-swaddling guide, be a bunch of Day-Glo crazies
   who have as one of their mottoes: "Never trust a Prankster." The Acid
   Tests would be like the Angels' party plus all the ideas that had gone
   into the Dome fantasy. Everybody would take acid, any time they wanted,
   six hours before the Test began or the moment they got there, at whatever
   point in the trip they wanted to enter the new planet. In any event, they
   would be on a new planet.

   The mysteries of the synch! Very strange ... the Acid Tests turned out, in
   fact, to be an art form foreseen in that strange book, Childhood's End, a
   form called "total identification": "The history of the cinema gave the
   clue to their actions. First, sound, then color, then stereoscopy, then
   Cinerama, had made the old moving pictures' more and more like reality
   itself. Where was the end of the story? Surely, the final stage would be
   reached when the audience forgot it was an audience, and became part of
   the action. To achieve this would involve stimulation of all the senses,
   and perhaps hypnosis as well... When the goal was attained, there would be
   an enormous enrichment of human experience. A man could become-for a
   while, at least,-any other person, and could take part in any conceivable
   adventure, real or imaginary.... And when the 'program' was over, he would
   have acquired a memory as vivid as any experience in his actual
   life-indeed, indistinguishable from reality itself."

   Too freaking true!

   THE FIRST ACID TEST ENDED UP MORE LIKE ONE OF THE OLD acid parties at La
   Honda, which is to say, a private affair, and mostly formless. It was
   meant to be public, but the Pranksters were not the world's greatest at
   the mechanics of things, like hiring a hall. The first one was going to be
   in Santa Cruz. But they couldn't hire a hall in time. They had to hold it
   out at Babbs's house, a place known as the Spread, just outside of Santa
   Cruz in a community known as Soquel. The Spread was like a rundown chicken
   farm. The wild vetch and dodder vines were gaining ground every minute, at
   least where the ground wasn't burnt off or beaten down into a clay muck.
   There were fat brown dogs and broken vehicles and rusted machines and
   rotting troughs and recapped tires and a little old farmhouse with
   linoleum floors and the kind of old greasy easy chairs that upholstery
   flies hover over in nappy clouds and move off about three-quarters of an
   inch when you wave your hand at them. But there were also wild Day-Glo
   creations on the walls and ceilings, by Babbs, and the place was private
   and tucked off by itself. In any case, they were stuck with the Spread.

   About all the advertising they could do was confined to the day of the
   Test itself. Norman Hartweg had painted a sign on some cardboard and
   tacked it onto some boards Babbs had used

   as cue signs in the movie, and put it up in the Hip Pocket Bookstore. Can
   YOU pass the Acid Test? The Hip Pocket Bookstore was a paperback bookstore
   that Hassler and Peter Demma, one of the Prankster outer circle, were
   running in Santa Cruz. They left word in the store that afternoon that it
   was going to be at Babbs's. A few local bohos saw it and came out, but
   mainly it was the Pranksters and their friends who showed up at the Spread
   that night, including a lot of the Berkeley crowd that had been coming to
   La Honda. Plus Allen Ginsberg and his entourage.

   It started off as a party, with some of the movie flashed on the walls,
   and lights, and tapes, and the Pranksters providing the music themselves,
   not to mention the LSD. The Pranksters' strange atonal Chinese music
   broadcast on all frequencies, `a la John Cage. It was mostly just another
   La Honda party-but then around 3 a.m. a thing happened ... The
   non-involved people, the people just there for the beano, the people who
   hadn't seen the Management, like the Berkeley people, they had all left by
   3 a.m. and the Test was down to some kind of core ... It ended up with
   Kesey on one side of Babbs's living room and Ginsberg on the other, with
   everybody else arranged around these two poles like on a magnet, all the
   Kesey people over toward him and all the Ginsberg people toward him-The
   super-West and the super-East-and the subject got to be Vietnam. Kesey
   gives his theory of whole multitudes of people joining hands in a clump
   and walking away from the war. Ginsberg said all these things, these wars,
   were the result of misunderstandings. Nobody who was doing the fighting
   ever wanted to be doing it, and if everybody could only sit around in a
   friendly way and talk it out, they could get to the root of their
   misunderstanding and settle it-and then from the rear of the Kesey
   contingent came the voice of the only man in the room who had been within
   a thousand miles of the war, Babbs, saying, "Yes, it's all so very
   obvious. "

   It's all so very obvious . . .

   How magical that comment seemed at that moment! The magical eighth hour of
   acid-how clear it all now was-Ginsberg had said it, and Babbs, the
   warrior, had certified it, and it had all built to this, and suddenly
   everything was so . . . very . . .clear . . .

   The Acid Test at the Spread was just a dry run, of course. It didn't
   really . .. reach out into the world ... But! soon ... the Rolling Stones,
   England's second hottest pop group, were coming to San Jose, 40 miles
   south of San Francisco, for a show in the Civic Auditorium on December 4.
   Kesey can see it all, having seen it before. He can see all the wound-up
   wired-up teeny freaks and assorted multitudes pouring out of the Cow
   Palace after the Beatles show that night, the fragmented pink-tentacled
   beast, pouring out still aquiver with ecstasy and jelly beans all cocked
   and aimless with no flow to go off in ... It is so very obvious.

   For three or four days the Pranksters searched for a hall in San Jose and
   couldn't come up with one-naturally-it really seemed natural and almost
   right that nothing should be definite until the last minute. All that was
   certain was that they would find one at the last minute. The Movie would
   create that much at least. And what if the multitudes didn't know where it
   was going to be until the last minute? Well, those who were meant to be
   there-those who were in the pudding-they would get there. You were either
   on the bus or off the bus, and that went for the whole world, even in San
   Jose, California. At the last minute Kesey talked a local boho figure
   known as Big Nig into letting them use his old hulk of a house.

   Kesey had hooked up with a rock 'n' roll band, The Grateful Dead, led by
   Jerry Garcia, the same dead-end kid who used to live in the Chateau in
   Palo Alto with Page Browning and other seeming no-counts, lumpenbeatniks,
   and you had to throw them out when they came over and tried to crash the
   parties on Perry Lane. Garcia remembered-how they came down and used to
   get booted out "by Kesey and the wine drinkers." The wine drinkers-the
   middle-class bohemians of Perry Lane. They both, Kesey and Garcia, had
   been heading into the pudding, from different directions, all that time,
   and now Garcia was a, yes, beautiful person, quiet, into the pudding, and
   a great guitar player. Garcia had first named his group The Warlocks,
   meaning sorcerers or wizards, and they had been eking by playing for the
   beer drinkers, at jazz joints and the like around Palo Alto. To the
   Warlocks, the beer drinker music, even when called jazz, was just square
   hip. They were on to that distinction, too. For Kesey-they could just
   play, do their thing.

   The Dead had an organist called Pig Pen, who had a Hammond electric organ,
   and they move the electric organ into Big Nig's ancient house, plus all of
   the Grateful Dead's electrified guitars and basses and the Pranksters'
   electrified guitars and basses and flutes and horns and the light machines
   and the movie projectors and the tapes and mikes and hi-fis, all of which
   pile up in insane coils of wires and gleams of stainless steel and winking
   amplifier dials before Big Nig's unbelieving eyes. His house is old and
   has wiring that would hardly hold a toaster. The Pranksters are primed in
   full Prankster regalia. Paul Foster has on his Importancy Coat and now has
   a huge head of curly hair, a great curly mustache pulling back into great
   curly mutton chops roaring off his face. Page Browning is the king of face
   painters. He becomes a full-fledged Devil with a bright orange face and
   his eyes become the centers of two great silver stars painted over the
   orange and his hair is silver with silver dust and he paints his lips
   silver with silver lipstick. This very night the Pranksters all sit down
   with oil pastel crayons and colored pens and at a wild rate start printing
   handbills on 8-1/2 X 11 paper saying Can YOU pass the Acid Test? and
   giving Big Nig's address. As the jellybean-cocked masses start pouring out
   of the Rolling Stones concert at the Civic Auditorium, the Pranksters
   charge in among them. Orange & silver Devil, wild man in a coat of
   buttons-Pranksters. Pranksters!-handing out the handbills with the
   challenge, like some sort of demons, warlocks verily, come to channel the
   wild pointless energy built up by the Rolling Stones inside.

   They come piling into Big Nig's, and suddenly acid and the Worldcraze were
   everywhere, the electric organ vibrating through every belly in the place,
   kids dancing not roc\ dances, not the frug and the-what?-swim, mother, but
   dancing ecstasy, leaping, dervishing, throwing their hands over their
   heads like Daddy Grace's own stroked-out inner courtiers-yes!-Roy
   Se-burn's lights washing past every head, Cassady rapping, Paul Foster
   handing people weird little things out of his Eccentric Bag, old whistles,
   tin crickets, burnt keys, spectral plastic handles. Everybody's eyes turn
   on like lightbulbs, fuses blow, blackness-wowwww!-the things that shake
   and vibrate and funnel and freak out in this blackness-and then somebody
   slaps new fuses in and the old hulk of a house shudders back, the wiring
   writhing and fragmenting like molting snakes, the organs vibro-massage the
   belly again, fuses blow, minds scream, heads explode, neighbors call the
   cops, 200,300,400 people from out there drawn into The Movie, into the
   edge of the pudding at least, a mass closer and higher than any mass in
   history, it seems most surely, and Kesey makes minute adjustment, small
   toggle switch here, lubricated with Vaseline No. 634-3 diluted with carbon
   tetrachloride, and they ripple, Major, ripple, but with meaning, 400 of
   the attuned multitude headed toward the pudding, the first mass acid
   experience, the dawn of the Psychedelic, the Flower Generation and all the
   rest of it, and Big Nig wants the rent.

   "How you holding?"

   How you holding-

   "I mean, like, you know," says Big Nig to Garcia. "I didn't charge Kesey
   nothing to use this place, like free?, you know? and the procedure now is
   that every cat here contributes, man, to help out with the rent." With the
   rent-

   "Yeah, I mean, like"-says Big Nig. Big Nig stares at Garcia with the
   deepest look of hip spade soul authority you can imagine, and nice and
   officious, too-

   Yeah, I mean, life-Garcia, for his part, however, doesn't know which
   bursts out first, the music or the orange laugh. Out the edges of his eyes
   he can see his own black hair framing his face-it is so long, to the
   shoulders, and springs out like a Sudanese soldier's-and then big Nig's
   big earnest black face right in front of him flapping and washing
   comically out into the glistening acid-glee red sea of faces out beyond
   them both in the galactic red lakes on the walls-

   "Yeah, I mean, like, for the rent, man," says Big Nig, "you already blown
   six fuses."

   Blown! Six fuses! Garcia sticks his hand into his electric guitar and the
   notes come out like a huge orange laugh all blown fuses electric spark
   leaps in colors upon the glistening sea of faces. It's a freaking laugh
   and a half. A new star is being born, like a light-bulb in a womb, and Big
   Nig wants the rent-a new star being born, a new planet forming, Ahura
   Mazda blazing in the world womb, here before our very eyes-and Big Nig,
   the poor pathetic spade, wants his rent.

   A freaking odd thought, that one. A big funky spade looking pathetic and
   square. For twenty years in the hip life, Negroes never even looked
   square. They were the archetypical soul figures. But what is Soul, or
   Funky, or Cool, or Baby-in the new world of the ecstasy, the All-one .. .
   the kairos....

   IF ONLY THERE WERE THE PERFECT PLACE, WHICH WOULD BE a place big enough
   for the multitudes and isolated enough to avoid the cops, with their
   curfews and eternal hassling. Shortly after that they found the perfect
   place, by acci-

   By accident, Mahavira?

   The third Acid Test was scheduled for Stinson Beach, 15 miles north of San
   Francisco. Stinson Beach was already a gathering place for local heads.
   You could live all winter in little beach cottages there for next to
   nothing. There was a nice solid brick recreation hall on the beach, all
   very nice-but at the last minute that whole deal fell through, and they
   shifted to Muir Beach, a few miles south. The handbills were already out,
   all over the head sections of San Francisco, Can YOU pass the Acid Test,
   advertising Cassady & Ann Murphy Vaudeville and celebrities who might be
   there, which included anybody who happened to be in town, or might make it
   to town, the Fugs, Ginsberg, Roland Kirk. There were always some nice
   chiffon subjunctives and the future conditionals in the Prankster handbill
   rhetoric, but who was to deny who might be drawn into the Movie . ..

   Anyway, at the last minute they headed for Muir Beach instead. The fact
   that many people wouldn't know about the change and would go to Stinson
   Beach and merely freeze in the darkness and never find the right
   place-somehow that didn't even seem distressing. It was part of some
   strange analogical order of the universe. Norman Hartweg hooked down his
   LSD-it was in the acid gas capsules that night-and thought of Gurdjieff.
   Gurdjieff wouldn't announce a meeting until the last minute. We're gonna
   get together tonight. The people that got there, got there; and there was
   message in that alone. Which was, of course: you're either on the bus or
   off the bus.

   Those who were on the bus, even if they weren't Pranksters, like Marshall
   Efron, the round Mercury of Hip California, or the Hell's Angels... all
   found it. The cops, however, never did. They were apparently thrown off by
   the Stinson Beach handbills.

   Muir Beach had a big log-cabin-style lodge for dances, banquets, and the
   like. The lodge was stilted up out in a waste of frigid marsh grass. A big
   empty nighttime beach in winter. Some little log tourist cabins with blue
   doors on either side, all empty. The lodge had three big rooms and was
   about 100 feet long, all logs and rafters and exposed beams, a tight ship
   of dark wood and Roughing It. The Grateful Dead piled in with their
   equipment and the Pranksters with theirs, which now included a Hammond
   electric organ for Gretch and a great strobe light.

   The strobe! The strobe, or stroboscope, was originally an instrument for
   studying motion, like the way a man's legs move when he is running. In a
   darkened chamber, for example, you aim a bright light, flashing on and
   off, at the runner's legs as he runs. The light flashes on and off very
   rapidly, maybe three times as fast as a normal heartbeat. Every time the
   light flashes on, you see a new stage in the movement of the runner's
   legs. The successive images tend to freeze in your mind, because the light
   flashes off before the usual optical blur of the motion can hit you. The
   strobe has certain magical properties in the world of the acid heads. At
   certain speeds stroboscopic lights are so synched in with the pattern of
   brain waves that they can throw epileptics into a seizure. Heads
   discovered that strobes could project them into many of the sensations of
   an LSD experience without taking LSD. The strobe!

   To people standing under the mighty strobe everything seemed to fragment.
   Ecstatic dancers-their hands flew off their arms, frozen in the air-their
   glistening faces came apart-a gleaming ellipse of teeth here, a pair of
   buffered highlit cheekbones there-all flacking and fragmenting into images
   as in an old flicker movie-a man in slices!-all of history pinned up on a
   butterfly board; the experience, of course. The strobe, the projectors,
   the mikes, the tapes, the amplifiers, the variable lag Ampex-it was all
   set up in a coiling gleaming clump in the Lincoln Log lodge, the communal
   clump, Babbs working over the dials, talking into the microphones to test
   them. Heads beginning to pour in. Marshall Efron and Norman, Norman
   already fairly zonked ... Then in comes Kesey, through the main door-

   Everyone watches. His face is set, his head cocked slightly. He is going
   to do something; everyone watches, because this seems terribly important.
   Drawn in right away by the charismatic vacuum cleaner, they are. Kesey
   heads for the control center, saying nothing to anyone, reaches into the
   galaxy of dials, makes ... a single minute adjustment... yes! one toggle
   switch, double-pole, single-throw, double-break, in the allegory of
   Control. . .

   Babbs is there, bombed, but setting up the intricate glistening coils of
   the tapes and projectors and the rest of it. Each of the Pranksters,
   bombed, has some fairly exacting task to do. Norman is staring at the
   dials-and he can't even see the numbers, he is so bombed, the numbers are
   wriggling off like huge luminous parasites under a
   microscope-but--function under acid. Babbs says, "One reason we're doing
   this is to learn how to function on acid." Of course! Prepare for the
   Day-when multitudes, millions, civilizations are on acid, seeking satori,
   it is coming, the wave is spreading.

   The heads are all sitting around on the floor, about 300 of them. Into the
   maelstrom! Yes. At Big Nig's in San Jose, a lot of the kids the Pranksters
   had corralled coming out of the Rolling Stones show did not take LSD that
   night, although there were enough heads at Big Nig's stoned on various
   things to create that sympathetic vibration known as the "contact high."
   But this is different. Practically everybody who has found the place,
   after the switch from Stinson Beach, is far enough into the thing to know
   what the "acid" in the Acid Test means. A high percentage took LSD about
   four hours ago, rode out the first rush and are ready ... now to groove
   ... The two projectors shine forth with The Movie. The bus and the
   Pranksters start rolling over the walls of the lodge, Babbs and Kesey
   rapping on about it, the Bus lumping huge and vibrating and bouncing in
   great swells of heads and color-Norman, zonked, sitting on the floor, is
   half frightened, half ecstatic, although something in the back of his mind
   recognizes this as his Acid Test pattern, to sit back and watch, holding
   on through the rush, until 3 or 4 a.m., in the magic hours, and then
   dance-but so much of a rush this time! The Movie and Roy Seburn's light
   machine pitching the inter-galactic red science-fiction seas to all
   corners of the lodge, oil and water and food coloring pressed between
   plates of glass and projected in vast size so that the very ooze of
   cellular Creation seems to ectoplast into the ethers and then the Dead
   coming in with their immense submarine vibrato vibrating, garanging, from
   the Aleutian rocks to the baja griffin cliffs of the Gulf of California.
   The Dead's weird sound! agony-in-ecstasis! submarine somehow, turbid half
   the time, tremendously loud but like sitting under a waterfall, at the
   same time full of sort of ghoul-show vibrato sounds as if each string on
   their electric guitars is half a block long and twanging in a room full of
   natural gas, not to mention their great Hammond electric organ, which
   sounds like a movie house Wurlitzer, a diathermy machine, a Citizens' Band
   radio and an Auto-Grind garbage truck at 4 a.m., all coming over the same
   frequency ... Then suddenly another movie

   The Frogman

   Babbs and Gretch and Hagen made it down in Santa Cruz, the story of Babbs
   the Frogman, arising from the Pacific in black neopreme Frogman suit from
   flippers to insect goggles, the pranking monster, falling in love with the
   Princess, Gretch, with floods of frames from elsewhere-the Bus
   Movie?-brittering in stroboscopically Frogman woos her and wins her and
   loses her to the Pacific Chohans in submarinal projection

   Babbs! Gretch!

   Norman has never seen a movie while under acid before and it deepens,
   deepens, deepens in perspective, this movie, the most 3-D movie ever made,
   until they are standing right before him, their very neopreme fairy tails
   and the Pacific is so far in the distance and black out beyond the marshes
   around the Muir Beach lodge until Babbs and Gretch are now in the room in
   the flesh in two separate spots, here before me on the beach and over here
   in this very room in this very lodge on the beach, Babbs at the microphone
   and Gretch nearby at the new Hammond organ-such synch! that they should
   narrate and orchestrate their own lives like this, in variable lag, layer
   upon layer of variable lags

   Heeeeeeeee into the whirlpool who should appear but Owsley. Owsley, done
   up in his $600 head costume, has emerged from his subterrain of espionage
   and paranoia to come to see the Prankster experiment for himself, and in
   the middle of the giddy contagion he takes LSD. They never saw him take it
   before. He takes the LSD and

   Rrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrroil the whirlpool picks him up and spins him down
   into the stroboscope stereoptic prankster panopticon in full variable lag

   Such creatures

   Hell's Angels come reeling in, shrieking Day-Glo, then clumping together
   on the floor under the black light and then most gentle Buddha blissly
   passing around among themselves various glittering Angel esoterica,
   chains, Iron Crosses, knives, buttons, coins, keys, wrenches, spark plugs,
   grokking over these arcana winking in the Day-Glo. Orange & Silver devil
   gliding through the dancers grinning his Zea-lot grin in every face, and
   Kesey crouched amid the gleaming coils, at the

   Controls

   Kesey looks out upon the stroboscopic whirlpool-the dancers! flung and
   flinging! in ecstasis!  gyrating! levitating! men in slices! in ping-pong
   balls! in the creamy bare essence and it reaches a

   Synch

   he never saw before. Heads from all over the acid world out here and all
   whirling into the pudding. Now let a man see what

   Control

   is. Kesey mans the strobe and a twist of the mercury lever

   Up

   and they all speed up

   Now

   the whole whirlpool, so far into it, they are. Faster they dance, hands
   thrown up off their arms like confetti in the strobe flashing, blissful
   faces falling apart and being exchanged, for I am you and you are me in
   Cosmo's Tasmanian deviltry. Turn it

   Down

   and they slow down-or We turn down-It-Cosmo-turns down, still in perfect
   synch, one brain, one energy, a single flow of intersubjectivity. It is
   possible this alchemy so dreamed of by all the heads. It is happening
   before them

   Control

   curiously, after the first rush at the acid test, there would be long
   intervals of the most exquisite boredom. Exquisite, because it was so
   unsuspected after the general frenzy. Nothing would happen, at least not
   in the usual sense. Those who were ... not on the bus... would come to the
   realization that there was no schedule. The Grateful Dead did not play in
   sets; no eight numbers to a set, then a twenty-five-minute break, and so
   on, four or five sets and then the close-out. The Dead might play one
   number for five minutes or thirty minutes. Who kept time? Who could keep
   time, with history cut up in slices. The Dead could get just as stoned as
   anyone else. The... non-attuned would look about and here would be all
   manner of heads, including those running the show, the Pranksters, stroked
   out against the walls like slices of Jello. Waiting; with nobody looking
   very likely to start it back up. Those who didn't care to wait would tend
   to drift off, stoned or otherwise, and the Test would settle down to the
   pudding. The Prankster band started the strange Chinese cacophony of its
   own, with Gretch wailing on the new electric organ. Norman got up and
   danced, it being that time. He even fooled about a bit with a little light
   projection thing of his own, although he didn't think it was good enough,
   but the magic hours were coming on like electric velvet. Kesey spoke
   softly over the microphone. They were into the still of the hurricane, the
   pudding.

   AT DAWN - A FREAKING COLD LIGHT ON THE MARSH GRASS AND the beach. A purple
   shadow all over the ocean like one huge stone-cold bruise. Suddenly the
   main door bursts open and it's Owsley.

   Owsley is lurching and groping and screaming

   "Survival!"

   It comes out like a steam whistle forced out of a constricted little
   opening

   "Survival!"

   Owsley, the Acid King, in his $600 head outfit, groping through the blue
   bruise dawn with his eyes like disaster craters, hissing

   "Survival!"

   The sight of Kesey apparently hits him with a surge of adrenaline,
   however, because he recovers his voice and starts in on Kesey:

   "Kesey!"

   The gist of it is that Kesey can't do this again. This is the end. The
   Acid Tests are over. Kesey is a maniac and the Tests are maniacal and the
   roof is falling in. Taking LSD in a monster group like this gets too many
   forces going, too much amok energy, causing very freaky and destructive
   things to happen, and so on. It's his acid and he says this is the end.
   None of them can figure out precisely what he is saying. Just that he has
   flipped and Kesey did it.

   Little by little, they piece it together. He has had quite a trip for
   himself on his own LSD, has Owsley. It seems that Owsley took the LSD, a
   good dose, apparently, and the strobe light and the incredible layers of
   variable lag began rocking and rippling him and it threw him into a time
   warp, or parallel time dimension. The heads were always talking about such
   things. They could cite some serious thinkers, scientists even, such as C.
   D. Broad and his theory of a second temporal dimension-"events which are
   separated by a temporal gap in one dimension may be adjoined without any
   gap in the other, just as two points in the earth's surface which differ
   in longitude may be identical in latitude"-or J. W. Dunne's theory of
   serialism, or infinite regress-or Maurice Maeterlinck. The heads were
   always talking about such things and Owsley was primed for it. Then he got
   high. Then he got caught in the whirlpool, spun out of his gourd by all
   the special effects of the Pranksters' variable lag devices-and the legend
   of the trip he took eventually was told as follows:

   Back he went into the eighteenth century, Count Cagliostro! no longer
   plain Giuseppe Balsamo of Palermo, the Oakland of the Mediterranean, but
   the good Count, alchemist, seer, magician, master of precognition,
   forecaster of lotteries, alchemical creator, from out of base elements
   of... this diamond, greatest and most dazzling in history-here, Cardinal
   Louis de Rohan-but!-persecuted as a thaumaturge-thrust into this spinning
   black donjon, the Bastille, seeping with lurid water and carbonated moss
   and twitching dismembered rats, anatomized in the flashing light of the
   diamond they wouldn't believe, a rat shank here, a rat metacarpal there,
   rat teeth, rat eyes, rat tails leaping and frozen in the air like city
   lights-that noise-a mob in the streets-either salvation-or-the Bastille
   begins to disintegrate into absorbent felt cubes-

   -and so on. The world began fragmenting on him. It began coming totally to
   pieces, breaking up into component parts, and he wasn't even back in the
   twentieth century yet, he was trapped-where?-Paris in 1786? ... The whole
   world was coming to pieces molecule by molecule now and swimming like
   grease bubbles in a cup of coffee, disappearing into the inter-galactic
   ooze and gasses all around-including his own body. He lost his skin, his
   skeleton, his pulmonary veins-sneaking out into the ooze like eels, they
   are, reeking phosphorus, his neural ganglia-unraveling like hot worms and
   wiggling down the galactic drain, his whole substance dissolving into
   gaseous nothingness until finally he was down to one cell. One human cell:
   his; that was all that was left of the entire known world, and if he lost
   control of that one cell, there would be nothing left. The world would be,
   like, over. He has to rebuild himself and the entire world from that one
   cell with a gigantic act of will-too overwhelming. Where does a man start?
   With California Route 1 so he can get out of here in his car? or will it
   turn out to be merely the filthy Rue Ventru with the Bastille mobs
   waiting? or start with the car? the differential? how do they make the
   bastards? or the beach? all those freaking grains of sand? the marsh
   grass? the tourist cabins? got to put every blue door back? or the ocean?
   or leave it dry? save making all those filthy blind bathosphere black
   animals down there ... or the sky? how far does it go? the Big Dipper? the
   Ursa Minor? the Delphinium? suppose it is really infinite concentric
   spheres of crystal making infinite gelatinous submarinal vibrations? the
   Dead? the Pranksters? Kesey, Kesey's out for good, Kesey and the
   bathosphere brutes-but with a superheroic effort he begins. But by the
   time he gets himself remade, it is too much. It is overwhelming. He makes
   his car. He makes the parking lot and the beginning of the road out. He'll
   make the rest of it as he goes along. Freak it! Split! Leave the rest of
   the known world to its own devices, out in the gasses. He jumped into the
   car and gunned off; and smashed it into a tree. A tree he hadn't even put
   back  yet. But the crash somehow pops the whole world back. There it is;
   back from the fat-bubbling ooze. The car is smashed, but he has survived.
   Survived!

   Survival!

   and he plunges into the lodge to seek out the maniac Kesey. That sombitch
   has prolly popped back, too.

                                    chapter

                                      XIX

                               The Trips Festival

   Owsley's freakout! owsley became obsessed with it himself. Whenever the
   subject was the LSD experience- which it was most of the time around
   Owsley-he would recount his experience at Muir Beach. It seemed to horrify
   and intrigue him at the same time-such morbid but wonderful details.
   Everyone listens ... can such things be? In any case, it sounded like
   Owsley thought Kesey was a demon and he was going to cut off their LSD
   supply.

   Richard Alpert was also unhappy with the Acid Tests. Alpert, like Timothy
   Leary, had sacrificed his academic career as a psychologist for the sake
   of the psychedelic movement. It was hard enough to keep the straight
   multitudes from going hysterical over the subject of LSD even in the best
   of circumstances-let alone when it was used for manic screaming orgies in
   public places. Among the heads who leaned toward Leary and Alpert, it was
   hard to even freaking believe that the Pranksters were pulling a freaking
   prank like this. Any moment they were expecting them to explode into some
   sort of debacle, some sort of mass freakout, that the press could seize on
   and bury the psychedelic movement forever. The police watched them
   closely, but there was very little they could do about it, except for an
   occasional marijuana bust, since there was no law against LSD at the time.
   The Pranksters went on to hold Tests in Palo Alto, Portland, Oregon, two
   in San Francisco, four in and around Los Angeles-and three in Mexico-and
   no laws broken here, Lieutenant-only every law of God and man-In short, a
   goddamn outrage, and we're powerless-

   The Acid Tests were one of those outrages, one of those scandals, that
   create a new style or a new world view. Everyone clucks, fumes, grinds
   their teeth over the bad taste, the bad morals, the insolence, the
   vulgarity, the childishness, the lunacy, the cruelty, the
   irresponsibility, the fraudulence and, in fact, gets worked up into such a
   state of excitement, such an epitasis, such a slaver, they can't turn it
   loose. It becomes a perfect obsession. And now they'll show you how it
   should have been done.

   The Acid Tests were the epoch of the psychedelic style and practically
   everything that has gone into it. I don't mean merely that the Pranksters
   did it first but, rather, that it all came straight out of the Acid Tests
   in a direct line leading to the Trips Festival of January 1966. That
   brought the whole thing full out in the open. "Mixed media"
   entertainment-this came straight out of the Acid Tests' combination of
   light and movie projections, strobes, tapes, rock 'n' roll, black light.
   "Acid rock"-the sound of the Beatles' Sergeant Pepper album and the
   high-vibrato electronic sounds of the Jefferson Airplane, the Mothers of
   Invention and many other groups-the mothers of it all were the Grateful
   Dead at the Acid Tests. The Dead were the audio counterpart of Roy
   Seburn's light projections. Owsley was responsible for some of this,
   indirectly. Owsley had snapped back from his great Freakout and started
   pouring money into the Grateful Dead and, thereby, the Tests. Maybe he
   figured the Tests were the wave of the future, whether he had freaked out
   or not. Maybe he thought "acid rock" was the sound of the future and he
   would become a kind of Brian Epstein for the Grateful Dead. I don't know.
   In any case, he started buying the Dead equipment such as no rock 'n' roll
   band ever had before, the Beatles included, all manner of tuners,
   amplifiers, receivers, loudspeakers, microphones, cartridges, tapes,
   theater horns, booms, lights, turntables, instruments, mixers, muters,
   servile mesochroics, whatever was on the market. The sound went down so
   many microphones and hooked through so many mixers and variable lags and
   blew up in so many amplifiers and roiled around in so many speakers and
   fed back down so many microphones, it came on like a chemical refinery.
   There was something wholly new and deliriously weird in the Dead's sound,
   and practically everything new in rock 'n' roll, rock jazz I have heard it
   called, came out of it.

   Even details like psychedelic poster art, the quasi-art nouveau swirls of
   lettering, design and vibrating colors, electro-pastels and spectral
   Day-Glo, came out of the Acid Tests. Later other impresarios and
   performers would recreate the Prankster styles with a sophistication the
   Pranksters never dreamed of. Art is not eternal, boys. The posters became
   works of art in the accepted cultural tradition. Others would even play
   the Dead's sound more successfully, commercially, anyway, than the Dead.
   Others would do the mixed-media thing until it was pure ambrosial candy
   for the brain with creamy filling every time. To which Kesey would say:
   "They know where it is, but they don't know what it is."

   IT WAS ACTUALLY STEWART BRAND WHO THOUGHT UP THE great Trips Festival of
   January 1966. Brand and a San Francisco artist, Ramon Sender. Brand was 27
   and an ex-biologist who had run across the Indian peyote cults in Arizona
   and New Mexico. Brand founded an organization called America Needs
   Indians. And then one day he took some LSD, right after an Explorer
   satellite went up to photograph the earth, and as the old synapses began
   rapping around inside his skull at 5,000 thoughts per second, he was
   struck with one of those questions that inflame men's brains: Why Haven't
   We Seen a Photograph of the Whole Earth Yet?-and he drove across America
   from Berkeley, California, to 116th Street, New York City, selling buttons
   with that legend on them to Leftists, Rightists, Fundamentalists,
   Theosophists, malcontents, anyone with the health or stealth of paranoia
   or the put-on in their souls ...

   He and his friend Sender got the idea of pulling together all the new
   forms of expression that were kicking around in the hip world at that
   moment and having a Super Acid Test out in the open. Hire a hall and call
   in the multitudes. They found an impresario for the thing, Bill Graham, a
   New Yorker who had a lot of cachet in the hip world of San Francisco as a
   member of the San Francisco Mime Troupe, which used to get busted for
   putting on political dumb shows in the park, that kind of thing. The Trips
   Festival was set for Friday, Saturday, and Sunday nights, January 21-23,
   at the Longshoremen's Hall in San Francisco. The Trips Festival was billed
   as a big celebration that was going to simulate an LSD experience, minus
   the LSD, using light effects and music, mainly. The big night, Saturday
   night, was going to be called The Acid Test, featuring Ken Kesey and the
   Merry Pranksters.

   Kesey and the Pranksters were primed for the Festival. Even Mountain Girl
   was on hand. She had wrestled the thing out in her mind and was back on
   the bus. The Pranksters had just held an Acid Test at the Fillmore
   Auditorium, a big ballroom in the middle of one of San Francisco's big
   Negro slums, the Fillmore district. It was a wild night. Hundreds of heads
   and bohos from all over the Bay area turned out, zonked to the eyeballs.
   Paul Krassner was back in town, and he heard the word that was out on . ..
   The Scene. Everybody would be "dropping acid" about 5 or 6 p.m. to get
   ready for the Acid Test to begin that night at nine o'clock at the
   Fillmore Auditorium. Krassner arrives and- shit!-he sees:

   ... a ballroom surrealistically seething with a couple of thousand bodies
   stoned out of their everlovin bruces in crazy costumes and obscene makeup
   with a raucous rock 'n roll band and stroboscope lights and a thunder
   machine and balloons and heads and streamers and electronic equipment and
   the back of a guy's coat proclaiming Please don't believe in magic to a
   girl dancing with 4-inch eyelashes so that even the goddamn Pinkerton
   Guards were contact high.

   Kesey asks him to take the microphone and contribute to a running
   commentary on the scene. "All I know," he announces into the din, "is that
   if I were a cop and I came in here, I wouldn't know where to begin."

   Well, the cops came in, and they didn't know where to begin. They came in
   to close the Test down at 2 a.m. in keeping with a local ordinance and the
   whole thing was at its maddest height. Mountain Girl had hold of a
   microphone and was shrieking encouragement to the flailing dancers. Babbs
   was beaming spotlights at heads who were veering around bombed and asking
   them spectral questions over another microphone-Say there, what's your
   trouble-have you l-o-s-t y-o-u-r mi-i-i-i-i-i-i-nd!  Page Browning was
   grinning Zea-lot. The cops started shouting for them to close down but
   couldn't make themselves heard and started pulling plugs out, microphone
   plugs, loudspeaker plugs, strobe plugs, amplifier plugs-but there were so
   many goddamn plugs, the most monumental snake pit of wires and plugs in
   history, and as fast as they would pull eight plugs out, Mountain Girl
   would put ten plugs back in, and finally Mountain Girl had a microphone up
   on the balcony somewhere and was screaming instructions to the dancers and
   the cops-louder music, more wine-and they couldn't find her. Finally they
   ordered the Pranksters to start clearing the place out, which they did,
   except for Babbs, who sat down in a chair and wouldn't budge. We said get
   busy, said the cops.

   "I don't have to," said Babbs. "I'm the boss here. They're working for me.
   "

   Yeah?-and one of the cops grabs Babbs by a luminous vest he has on,
   succeeding only in separating Babbs from the vest. Babbs grinning
   maniacally but suddenly looming most large and fierce.

   "You're under arrest!"

   "For what?"

   "Resistin'."

   "Resistin' what?"

   "You gonna come quietly or do we have to take you?"

   "Either way you want it," says Babbs, grinning in the most frightening
   manner now, like the next step is eight karate chops to the gizzards and
   giblets. Suddenly it is a Mexican standoff-with both sides glaring but
   nobody swinging a punch yet. It is a grand hassle, of course. At the last
   minute a couple of Kesey's lawyers arrive on the scene and cool everything
   down and talk the cops out of it and Babbs out of it and it all rumbles
   away in the valley as part of the Welthassle.

   THE LAWYERS - YES. KESEY'S ORIGINAL MARIJUANA CHARGE, on the big arrest at
   La Honda, had been ricocheting around in the San Mateo County court system
   for nine months. Kesey's lawyers were attacking the warrant that enabled
   the various constables to make the raid. The case had started with a Grand
   Jury hearing, which is of course a secret procedure. The County claimed it
   had all sorts of evidence to the effect that Kesey and the Pranksters had
   been giving dope to minors. Kesey's lawyers were trying to get the whole
   case thrown out on the grounds that the original warrant for the raid was
   fraudulent. This didn't work, and Kesey now had the choice of facing trial
   and a lot of lurid testimony or waiving open trial and letting a judge
   decide the case on the basis of the transcript of the Grand Jury
   proceedings. It was finally arranged that Kesey would let the judge do it.
   He would most likely be getting a light sentence. Even after that he could
   still appeal the case on the grounds that the warrant had been trumped up.
   This whole thing with the judge was the equivalent, in a roundabout way,
   of pleading no contest. On January 17, 1966, four days before the Trips
   Festival, the judge duly found Kesey guilty and sentenced him to six
   months on a work farm and three years on probation. This was about what
   his lawyers expected. It wasn't so bad. The work farm was right near La
   Honda, ironically enough, and the prisoners did a lot of their work
   clearing out a stretch of forest back of Kesey's place. There was
   something very funny about that. Lime-light bowers for the straight
   multitudes. There was more irony. McMurphy, in One Flew Over the Cuckoo's
   Nest, started his adventures with a six-month stretch on a work farm.
   Kesey had been a McMurphy on the outside for four years. Now maybe he
   would be a McMurphy on the inside, for real. Maybe ... anyway it was far
   from the goddamn end of the world. Then an uncool thing happened.

   THE NIGHT OF JANUARY 19, TWO NIGHTS BEFORE THE TRIPS Festival, Kesey,
   Mountain Girl, and some of the Pranksters went over to Stewart Brand's
   apartment, in North Beach, San Francisco, to make plans for the Trips
   Festival. Sometime after midnight Kesey and Mountain Girl went up on the
   roof on top of the building and spread out an old blue pad that had been
   in the back of somebody's station wagon on the gravel up there and
   stretched out on the pad, grooving on the peaceful debris of North Beach.
   It's nice and homey boho quaint, North Beach. Slums with a view. Out there
   the lights of the bay and the fishing boats and the honky-tonks and more
   lights climbing up the hills of San Francisco and nearer, all the asphalt
   squares of the other rooftops, squares and levels and ladders-grooving on
   the design, which is nice and peaceful and a little arty-looking, but that
   is North Beach. Mountain Girl all dark brown hair and big brown eyes,
   coming on ornery and fun-loving-it occurs to Kesey-rather like the eyes of
   an Irish setter pup just turning from awkward carefree frolic to the task
   of devotion.

   Mountain Girl is being enthusiastic about the Trips Festival. "With that
   big new speaker," she says, "we'll be able to wire that place so you can
   hear a flea fart!"

   Awkward carefree frolic to the task of-Kesey is feeling old. Once a stud
   so gorged with muscle tone-his face feels lopsided with the strain, of...
   the eternal hassling, the lawyering, the legally sanctioned lying on all
   sides, politicking, sucking up, getting lectured at, cranking on the old
   lopsided diplomatic smile ...

   "-hear a flea fart!" "Hasn't happened yet," says Kesey.

   "With this many days to set it up? Always before we were in the hall that
   night and maybe set up before we finished in the morning."

   And so forth and so on-Kesey and Mountain Girl lie on their stomachs with
   their chins in their hands, gazing down four stories to the alley below
   and occasionally scraping gravel off the rooftop and tossing it down ...

   ... yes... ummm ... at 1:53 a.m. the cops of the 19th Precinct got a call
   from a woman at 18 Margrave Place saying some drunken tormentors or
   something were throwing rocks at her window. Shortly after 2 a.m. a police
   car pulls into the alley. So Kesey and Mountain Girl groove on that. Yup,
   a police car right down below, police car come here. A red light on a
   hillside drive about 50 yards away blinks. A red light blinks and a police
   car tools in the alley. Ah, always the synch, friends. The cops are coming
   in this building. Wonder on earth what for. Do I learn anything? Or once
   again lie loaded and disbelieving as two cops climb five stories to drag
   me to the cooler.... Oh, the logic of the groove and the synch. Kesey and
   Mountain Girl see it all at once, now, so clearly. It is so very obvious
   that it fascinates. They see it all, grok it all-Scram, split, run, flee,
   hide, vanish, disintegrate-the red alert is so very clear, it blinks and
   blinks, red, nothing, red, nothing, red, nothing, red, nothing, and yet
   move? and miss it all? turning so slow in the interferrometric synch? It
   is like a weird time he was in Olympic wrestling eliminations, in 1960, in
   the San Francisco Olympic Club, first round against a hulking stud, and he
   took a couple of vitamins before the fray, revved up, revved up, not
   doped, oh mom&dad&buddy&sis&dear-but-square-ones, all Olympian athletes
   are doped, force-fed pill-heads, see them lead them, all gorged with
   glistening muscle veins and crewcut and led to the training table and by
   every plate a lineup of capsules like the wineglasses at the gourmet
   dinner, capsules for iron, capsules for calcium, capsules to make you
   squeeze your colon and flex your heart, capsules of B12 mighty as pure
   amphetamine turn your blood vessels into black snakes, capsules to make
   you long and brute in the teeth, make you clean & jerk in the arms, mad
   ape in the neck, sharp in the tusk, panther in the solar plexus lineup of
   crewcut stud bulls concocted out of chemicals force-fed every day at every
   plate-revved up, revved up, revved up waiting for the referee to snap his
   hand up in mid-air to start the match, snap... and it is so very
   fascinating ... he is like a motor running at top speed with the clutch in
   ... it is intriguing, not intimidating, the way this great stud grabs him
   above the knee with his huge hand and starts pulling down-Kesey is two
   people, revved up here on the mat and revved up here in the ethers like an
   astral body, watching-interesting!-no man could be as strong as this guy
   here and execute a takedown by pulling downward on the knee-no danger,
   friends, just fascination-and so the guy won a trophy for the fastest pin
   of the tourney, while the motor revved in synch with a different bummer-

   -fascinating!-so-

   -out the scroffy arty rooftop door come two cops, Officers Fred Pardella
   and Thomas L. O'Donnell of the 19th Precinct, by designation-

   What happened next became the subject of two trials in San Francisco,
   later, many fugitive months later, both ending in hung juries, the second
   one 11 to 1 against Kesey. According to Officers Pardella and O'Donnell,
   they found the suspects Kesey and the Adams girl and a plastic bag
   containing a quantity of brownish vegetation. Whereupon Officer O'Donnell
   sought to collect the evidence, and Kesey wrestled him for it, throwing
   the bag onto an adjoining arty rectangle rooftop and very nearly Pardella
   along with it, whereupon Officer O'Donnell drew his gun and brought both
   Kesey and the girl into custody. The plastic bag, retrieved, contained
   3.54 grams of marijuana.

   THIS WAS A BEAUTIFUL MESS AND NO TWO WAYS ABOUT IT. A second offense for
   possession of marijuana carried an automatic five-year sentence with no
   possibility of parole. At the very least he stood to get the full
   three-year sentence in San Mateo County now, as one of the judge's
   conditions had been that he no longer associate with the Pranksters.
   Mountain Girl was ready to take the whole rap herself. "We were just tying
   it off," she told the press. "He wasn't supposed to hang around with any
   of us wild, giddy people any more. This was the last time we were gonna
   see him." Well... she tried. Kesey's probation officer in San Mateo County
   advised him for godsake stay away from the Trips Festival or he was in for
   it, but the whole thing was miles beyond in-for-it, out towards old Edge
   City, in fact.

   Kesey left Municipal Court in San Francisco on January 20 with Mountain
   Girl and Stewart Brand and onto the whole bus full of Pranksters to roll
   through San Francisco advertising the Trips Festival. They got out at
   Union Square. Kesey wore a pair of white Levi's with the backsides
   emblazoned with HOT on the left side and COLD on the right and TIBET in
   the middle.- and a pair of sky-blue boots. They all played Ron Boisie's
   Thunder Machine for loon vibrations in Union Square in the fibrillateing
   heart of San Francisco.

   If nothing else, Kesey's second arrest was great publicity for the Trips
   Festival. It was all over San Francisco newspapers. In the hip,
   intellectual, and even social worlds of San Francisco, the Trips Festival
   notion was spreading like a fever. The dread drug LSD. Acid heads. An LSD
   experience without the LSD, it was being billed as-moreover, people
   actually believed it. But mainly the idea of a new life style was making
   itself felt. Do you suppose this is the-new wave... ?

   And you buy y'r ticket,  f'r chrissake-an absurd thought to Norman
   Hartweg-and we've got a promoter-all absurd, but the thousands pour into
   the Longshoremen's Hall for the Trips Festival, thousands even the first
   night, which was mostly Indian night, a weird thing put on by Brand's
   America Needs Indians, but now on Saturday evening the huge crush hits for
   the Acid Test. Norman is absolutely zonked on acid-and look at the freaks
   running in here. Norman is not the only one. "An LSD experience without
   LSD"-that was a laugh. In fact, the heads are pouring in by the hundreds,
   bombed out of their gourds, hundreds of heads coming out into the absolute
   open for the first time. It is like the time the Pranksters went to the
   Beatles concert in full costume, looking so bizarre and so totally smashed
   that no one could believe they were. Nobody would risk it in public like
   this. Well, the kids are just having an LSD experience without LSD, that's
   all, and this is what it looks like. A hulking crazed whirlpool. That's
   nice. Lights and movies sweeping around the hall; five movie projectors
   going and God knows how many light machines, interferrometrics, the
   intergalactic science-fiction seas all over the walls, loudspeakers
   studding the hall all the way around like flaming chandeliers, strobes
   exploding, black lights with Day-Glo objects under them and Day-Glo paint
   to play with, street lights at every entrance flashing red and yellow, two
   bands, the Grateful Dead and Big Brother and the Holding Company and a
   troop of weird girls in leotards leaping around the edges blowing dog
   whistles-and the Pranksters. Paul Foster has wrapped black friction tape
   all around his shoes and up over his ankles and swaddled his legs and hips
   and torso in it up to his rib cage, where begins a white shirt and then
   white bandaging all over his face and skull and just a slit for his eyes,
   over which he wears dark glasses. He also wears a crutch and a sign
   saying, You're in the Pepsi Generation and I'm a pimply freak!" Rotor!
   Also heads from all over, in serapes and mandala beads and Indian
   headbands and Indian beads, the great era for all that, and one in a
   leather jerkin with "Under Ass Wizard Mojo Indian Fighter" stenciled on
   the back. Mojo! Oh the freaking strobes turning every brain stem into a
   cauliflower erupting into corrugated ping-pong balls-can't stand it-and a
   girl rips off her shirt and dances bare-breasted with her great mihs
   breaking up into an endless stream of ruby-red erect nipples streaming out
   of the great milk-and-honey under the strobe lights. The dancing is
   ecstatic, a nice macaroni of braless breasts jiggling and cupcake bottoms
   wiggling and multiple arms writhing and leaping about. Thousands of
   straight intellectuals and culturati and square hippies, North Beach
   style, gawking and learning. Dr. Francis Rigney, Psychiatrist to the Beat
   Generation, looking on, and all the Big Daddies left over from the Beat
   period, Eric "Big Daddy" Nord and Tom "Big Daddy" Donahue, and the press,
   vibrating under Ron Boise's thunder machine. A great rout in progress, you
   understand.

   And in the center of the hall-the Pranksters' tower of Control. It had
   come to that, and it was perfect. Babbs had supervised the building of a
   great scaffolding of pipes and platforms in the center of the hall. It
   rose and rose, this tower, as the Pranksters added equipment, all the
   mikes and amplifiers and spots and projectors and all the rest of it, the
   very architecture of Control, finally. Babbs at the controls, Hagen up
   there taking movies; the Movie goes on. Kesey, meanwhile, was up on an
   even higher plateau of control, up on a balcony in a silver space suit
   complete with a big bubble space helmet. He conceived of it first as a
   disguise, so he could be there without the various courts being raggy and
   outraged, but everyone recognized the Space Man immediately, of course,
   and he perched up above the maelstrom with a projection machine with which
   you could write messages on acetate and project them in mammoth size on
   the walls.

   Zonker dancing in a spin of pure unadulterated bliss, higher than he had
   ever been in his life, which for Zonker was getting up there. Norman,
   smashed, but with a mission. Norman to circulate among the multitudes with
   movie camera. Only he has no power pack, so he has to plug the camera in a
   wall socket and go out with a great long cord. His eye pressed against the
   sighting lens and gradually the whole whirlpool coming into his one eye,
   unity, I, the vessel, receiving all, Atman and Brahman, letting it all
   flow in until-satori-the perfect state is reached and he realizes he is
   God. He has traveled miles through this writhing macaroni ecstasy mass and
   could the camera still possibly be plugged in?-or could that possibly
   matter? deus ex machina, with the world flowing into one eye. Becomes
   essential that he reach the Central Node, the Tower of Control, the great
   electric boom of the directional mike picking up the band sticking out
   from atop the scaffolding tower-and there it is-it is all there in this
   moment. Starts clambering up the scaffolding with the huge camera still
   over his shoulder and up to his eye, all funneling in, and the wire and
   plug snaking behind him, through the multitudes. And who might these irate
   forms be?-in truth, Babbs and Hagen, Babbs gesturing for Norman to get off
   the platform, he's in the way, there's no room, get the hell off of here-a
   cosmic laugh, since obviously they don't know who he is, viz., God.
   Norman, the meek, the mild, the retiring, the sideliner, laughs a cosmic
   laugh at them and keeps on coming. At any moment, he fully realizes, he
   can make them disappear down ... his eye, just two curds in the world
   flow, Babbs and Hagen.

   "Norman, if you don't get the hell off of here, I'm going to throw you
   off! "-Babbs looking huge and untamable in the same stance he gave the San
   Francisco cops at the Fillmore, and Norman's mind split just slightly
   along the chiasma, like a San Andreas fault, one part some durable
   hard-core fear of getting thrown off and breaking his ass, him, Norman,
   but the other, the Cosmic laugh of God at how useless Babbs's stance is
   now, vibrating slightly between God and not-God, but then the laugh comes
   in a wave, just the cosmic fact that he, Norman, now dares do this,
   defiance, the new I and there is not one thing, really, they can do about
   it-Babbs staring at this grinning, zonked figure with the huge camera
   clambering up the scaffolding. Babbs just throws his hands up, gives up,
   Norman ascends. God! in the very Tower of Control. Well, if I'm God, I can
   control this thing. Gazing down into the whirlpool. He gestures-and it
   comes to pass!-there is a ripple in the crowd there and again and there is
   a ripple in the crowd here-also so clear what is going to happen, he can
   predict it, a great eruption of ecstatic dancing in that clump, under the
   strobes, it will break out now, and it does, of course-a vibration along
   the crack, the fault, synchronicity spoken here, and we are at play, but
   they do it-start the music!-and it starts-satori, in the Central Node, as
   it was written-but I say unto you-and at that very moment, a huge message
   in red is written on the wall:

                   Anybody who knows he is God go up on stage

   Anybody?-The chiasmic halves vibrate, the God and the not-God, and then he
   realizes: Kesey wrote that. Kesey up on the balcony in his space suit
   wrote that with his projection machine and flashed it on the wall, in that
   very moment. What to do, Archangel of mine, Norman stares
   unbelieving-unbelieving in what?-up on stage climbs a spade with a wild
   head of natural spade hair with a headband wrapped around the hairline so
   the hair puffs up like a great gray dandelion, a huge shirt swimming under
   the lights, and it is Gaylord, one of the few spades in the whole thing,
   gleaming the glistening grin of acid zonk and going into a lovely godly
   little dance, this Gaylord God ... What the hell. Norman gestures toward
   the crowd, and it does not ripple. Not here and not there. He predicts
   that clump will rise up in ecstatic levitation, and it does not rise up.
   In fact, it just sinks to the floor like it was spat there, sad moon eyes
   glomming up in the acid stare. Sayonara, God. And yet... And yet...

                                     * * *

   THREE NIGHTS THE HUGE WILD CARNIVAL WENT ON. IT WAS A big thing on every
   level. For one thing, the Trips Festival grossed $12,500 in three days,
   with almost no overhead, and a new nightclub and dance-hall genre was
   born. Two weeks later Bill Graham was in business at the Fillmore
   auditorium with a Trips Festival going every weekend and packing them in.
   For the acid heads themselves, the Trips Festival was like the first
   national convention of an underground movement that had existed on a
   hush-hush cell-by-cell basis. The heads were amazed at how big their own
   ranks had become-and euphoric over the fact that they could come out in
   the open, high as baboons, and the sky, and the law, wouldn't fall down on
   them. The press went along with the notion that this had been an LSD
   experience without the LSD. Nobody in the hip world of San Francisco had
   any such delusion, and the Haight-Ashbury era began that weekend.

   The Trips Festival changed many things. But as soon as the whirlpool died
   down, Kesey was right back where he started, so far as the grinning
   lopsided frowning world of the San Mateo and San Francisco County courts
   were concerned. The bastids were digging in for prisoner's base. They had
   already dug him out of the place in La Honda. Part of the fiat of Judge de
   Matteis was that Kesey get out of La Honda and sell his place to somebody
   who had nothing to do with him or his works and stay out of San Mateo
   County except to see his probation officer or travel through on the Harbor
   Freeway or over the territorial boundaries of San Mateo County by airplane
   and remove himself and all his influences from said County. So Kesey and
   Faye and the kids moved into the Spread, Babbs's place, in Santa Cruz.
   Winding his way down there on January 23-there was a warrant waiting for
   his arrest on the grounds of violating probation.

   Well, that's their Movie, Tonto, and we all know how that one ends. Three
   years in the San Mateo donjon, plus the five or eight or twenty they come
   up with in San Francisco to teach a lesson while the iron and the spittle
   are hot to all the Trips Festival dope fiends. Kesey called an immediate
   briefing, and remember that little abjuration a couple months ago about
   prepare for Mexico... ?

   So they gathered at the Spread.

   "If society wants me to be an outlaw," said Kesey, "then I'll be an
   outlaw, and a damned good one. That's something people need. People at all
   times need outlaws."

   The Pranksters comprehended it all at once.

   So here is the current fantasy: tonight he is going to split for Mexico.
   He'll go across the border in the back of Ron Boise's truck. Boise was
   down at Babbs's at the time, and he had a truck that served as a kind of
   mobile studio. It had all his welding equipment and acetylene torches and
   the like and he would work back there on the mud flats out back, shaping
   old car fenders into the erotic poses of the Kama Sutra. Finally Roy
   Seburn's psychedelic car, his miniature bus, had been fed to the torches
   back there, too, as it was broken down for good. Nothing lasts. Art is not
   eternal. They would head for Puerto Vallarta. He would use another
   Prankster's driver's license as I.D. in case he needed it down there.
   Meanwhile, as a cover story, one last grand prank. The Suicide Trip.

   Kesey would write a suicide note. Then D-, who looked uncommonly like
   him-Dee would dress up like him and get in an old panel truck that was
   around there and drive up the coast, toward Oregon, and pick out a likely
   cliff and smash the truck into a tree trunk and get out and leave the
   suicide note on the seat of the truck and throw his sky-blue boots down by
   the shore so it would look like he had dived in the water and gone out to
   sea, never to come back to his swamp of troubles. The idea was that Dee
   would look enough like Kesey, especially in a Prankster costume, so that
   if anybody did happen to see him driving along the way, they would
   remember him as someone answering Kesey's description. Let 'em unravel
   that one. Even if they don't fall for it, at least it might take the heat
   off. Why should we go to all this trouble-the ninny might be lying on the
   bottom of the ocean, them damn dope fiends ...

   "I hope Dee doesn't do a Dee-out," Mountain Girl said. But she was
   optimistic. The whole thing had a lot of elan du Prank.

   That night Kesey and Mountain Girl got stoned on grass and started
   composing the great suicide note:

   "Last words. A vote for Barry is a vote for fun. I, Ken Kesey, being of
   (ahem) sound mind and body, do hereby leave the whole scene to Faye,
   Corporation, cash and the works (and it occurs to me here that nobody is
   going to buy this prank and now it occurs to me that I like that even
   better).. ."

   Shee-ut, this was fun. Put-on after put-on bubbled up in their brains, and
   all the bullshit metaphors of destiny, all the bullshit lines a good
   bullshit poet would come up with upon looking the Grim Creeper in the
   arsehole:

   "Wind, wind send me not this place, though, onward ..."

   More! More! Louder music, more wine!

   "... Ocean, ocean, ocean, I'll beat you in the end, I'll break you this
   time. I'll go through with my heels your hungry ribs..."

   On and on it went, like a running account of the mad-drive-to-be up the
   coast, looking for his favorite cliff, to jump off of, presumably, the
   whole scene bubbling up in his brain and Mountain Girl's on the ratty rug
   in Babbs's living room. Hell, let's throw in some acid-they'll believe the
   damn ninny dope fiend would take the dread LSD and break his ass for
   good-and hell, slam the freaking vehicle into a tree, bleed verisimilitude
   all over the California littoral:

   "... I've lost the ocean again. Beautiful. I drive hundreds of miles
   looking for my particular cliff, get so trapped behind acid I can't find
   the ocean, end up slamming into a redwood ..."

   Beautiful. Ready, Ron? He gets into Boise's truck and they head off south
   for San Diego, the Mexican border, Tijuana and the land of all competent
   Outlaws.

                                    chapter

                                       XX

                             The Electric Kool-Aid

                                   Acid Test

   WHAT HAPPENED TO THE PRANKSTERS AFTER KESEY'S flight to Mexico was so much
   like what happened to the League after Leo fled in Hermann Hesse's book
   The Journey to the East-well, it was freaking weird, this particular synch
   ... exactly ... the Pranksters ! and the great bus trip of 1964! their
   whole movie. No; it went on. Hesse's fantasy coincided with theirs all the
   way. It went on-all the way to this weird divide-

   The leader of the League in The Journey to the East was named Leo. He was
   never openly known as the leader: like Kesey, he was the "non-navigator"
   of the brotherhood. And Leo suddenly left "in the middle of the dangerous
   gorge of Morbio Inferiore," just when the League was deepest into its
   Journey to the East, in the critical phase of a trip that was being
   alternately denounced and wondered at. "From that time, certainty and
   unity no longer existed in our community, although the great idea still
   kept us together. How well I remember those first disputes! They were
   something so new and unheard-of in our hitherto perfectly united League.
   They were conducted with respect and politeness-at least in the beginning.
   At first they led neither to fierce conflicts nor personal reproaches or
   insults-at first we were still an inseparable, united brotherhood
   throughout the world ..." Things got more and more bitter, and the
   narrator, "H.," left after the Morbio Inferiore. And the narrator,
   Hartweg, left after ...

   Very weird, the synch!

   With Kesey gone, Babbs became the leader. There was no meeting, no vote,
   not even a parting word from Kesey. Babbs becomes the leader-the ... group
   mind knew that at once, without a second thought. They packed up
   everything at La Honda and took it up to Oregon, to Kesey's parents' home.
   The Archives they stashed at the Spread and, later, up at Chuck's house in
   Oregon. This and that they bequeathed to other heads, like the great round
   table with the Hell's Angels' carvings all over it. They gave that to a
   new psychedelic group, the Anonymous Artists of America, at a place called
   Rancho Diablo up at Skylonda. Whatever they could use for the Acid Tests
   they took along.

   Babbs moved the Acid Test scene to Los Angeles and the bus lumbered on
   down there. They had hardly gotten there before the soft rumblings
   started-"certainty and unity no longer existed in our community, although
   the great idea still kept us together. How well I remember those first
   disputes!" Babbs gives too many orders-Kesey, the non-navigator, merely
   expressed a will and merely waited for it to move forward in the Group
   Mind. Babbs runs this like the Army... like the Boy Scouts... Babbs's
   put-ons suddenly seemed pure sarcasm. His cryptic comments, his candor,
   seemed cruel. Some of the Pranksters even took to sympathizing with poor
   wretches like Pancho Pillow; the universally put-down acid-rapping fool,
   Pancho.

   Pancho, ever in the throes of self-laceration, was still desperate to be
   on the bus. The poor bastard spent his last earthly dime and traveled from
   San Francisco to Los Angeles and caught up with the bus in Lemon Grove one
   day. Pancho came ambling up with a huge grin of brotherhood and started to
   climb up the steps and Babbs met him at the door of the bus.

   "I don't think anybody wants you here," said Babbs.

   "What do you mean?" says Pancho. "Can't I come on the bus ? "

   "There's nobody on the bus who wants you on the bus."

   Pancho's grin is wiped off, of course, and his eyes start batting around
   like pinballs, trying to make out who is inside the bus-you all know me,
   I'm Pancho!

   "Well... I know I get on some people's nerves," says Pancho, "but I came
   all the way here to be with you guys, and I spent all my money getting
   here-"

   "We don't care," says somebody else's voice, on the bus.

   "Look," says Pancho, "I'll shut up, I'll do whatever you want. I just want
   to help with the Tests. I'll do anything-"

   "We don't care." Somebody else's voice, on the bus.

   "-odd jobs, run errands, there must be a thousand things-"

   "We don't care."

   Pancho stands there, speechless, his face bursts with red.

   "See," says Babbs, "it's like I said. I don't think there's anybody who
   wants you on here."

   Numb Pancho backs down off the steps and trudges off in Lemon Grove.

   Well, they had a good laugh over that. The freaking Pancho Pillow! A
   bad-trip freak if there ever was one! A breaker of balls extraordinaire!
   The human bummer: ::::: but it was a laugh with a metallic aftertaste,
   this joke on Pancho ::::::

   Babbs had gotten hold of an old mansion in L.A., called the Sans Souci, a
   great incredible moldering old place with a dome and a stone balustrade,
   all crumbling and moldering, but with style. When the owner found a bunch
   of beatniks in there, he freaked, but that was later. Anyway, one day they
   were all in there and one Prankster said a very unPrankster thing. He
   spoke up and said:

   "I want to voice this idea: I can't stand Margie and I don't want her
   around."

   Unfreakingbelievable. He was talking about Marge the Barge. So then all
   eyes went to Babbs, who was now thrust into the Kesey role of resolving
   all. Babbs turns to Marge the Barge and says:

   "What do you think about that?"

   Marge says: "I think that's ridiculous," and with such quiet flat
   conviction that nobody else says anything.

   A small moment-but one more moment in the gathering schism, the Babbs
   loyalists versus the had-enough-of-Babbs. Later they would realize they
   were in many cases merely blaming Babbs for the mysterious sense of loss
   in their venture. They were casting about for an explanation, and Babbs
   was It. What they had lost of course, was the magical cement of Kesey's
   charisma. "It seemed that the more certain his loss became, the more
   indispensable he seemed; without Leo, his handsome face, his good humor
   and his songs, without his enthusiasm for our great undertaking, the
   undertaking itself seemed in some mysterious way to lose meaning."

   IN FACT, BABBS CARRIED THE ACID TESTS INTO LOS ANGELES with an amazing
   determination. The Pranksters were now out of their home territory, the
   San Francisco area, but they performed with an efficiency they never knew
   they had before. It was as if they were all picking up on Babbs's
   exhortation of months ago: "We've got to learn how to function on acid."
   They were soaring out of their gourds themselves, but they were pulling
   off Acid Tests that seemed like they were orchestrated.

   Babbs was in great form, as I say, and he had also hooked up with a
   remarkable head named Hugh Romney, a poet, actor, and comedian who had
   gone the whole route, starting back in the Beat Generation days and was
   now into the LSD thing and had "discovered the Management," as he put it,
   "and when you discover the Management there's nothing to do but go to work
   for it." So Romney and his friend Bonnie Jean were now on the bus, and
   they all set out to-nothing more, nothing less-turn on Los Angeles to the
   Management. .. Yesss... The first Test was at Paul Sawyer's church in
   Northridge, just out from Los Angeles in the San Fernando Valley .. .
   Sawyer has never lost his willingness to experiment and is on the bus
   himself. And if the Sport Shirts could see these ... new experimental
   rites... including music, dance, and sacrifice-the sacrifice?-well... it
   was not strictly an Acid Test, but a "happening," which had become a
   harmless and un-loaded word in Cultural circles, even in Sawyer's Valley
   Unitarian-Universalist Church. A marvelous modern building shaped like a
   huge Bermuda onion, it was, forming one great towering . . . Dome, with
   fantastic acoustics like it had been created for the current fantasy
   itself. So the Pranksters moved in and wired and wound up the place, and
   hundreds arrived for the "happening," partaking of Prankster magic and
   pineapple chili, which was a concoction the Pranksters served, on the vile
   side in taste, but pineapple chili nonetheless, a wacky thought in itself.
   And Cassady had a microphone and started rapping, and Romney had a
   microphone and started rapping, and he was great, and Babbs and Paul
   Foster, flying with the God Rotor and not stuttering at all... People
   dancing in the most ecstatic way and getting so far into the thing, the
   straight multitudes even, that even they took microphones, and suddenly
   there was no longer any separation between the entertainers and the
   entertained at all, none of that well-look-at-you-startled-squares
   condescension of the ordinary happening. Hundreds were swept up in an
   experience, which built up like a dream typhoon, peace on the smooth
   liquid centrifugal whirling edge. In short, everybody in The Movie, on the
   bus, and it was beautiful... They were like... on! the Pranksters-now
   primed to draw the hundreds, the thousands, the millions into the new
   experience, and in the days ahead they came rushing in :::::

   ::::: Clair Brush, for one. Yes. She was a girl in her twenties, a pretty
   redhead, who worked for Art Kunkin, the editor of the hip circuit weekly,
   the Los Angeles Free Press. Her old friend Doc Stanley had called her up
   before the Test at Sawyer's church and said, Clair, there is going to be a
   happening in a Unitarian church in the Valley that you really ought to
   pick up on, and so forth ... But one of the things Clair did at the Free
   Press was compile a calendar of events for the hip circuit and this was
   the big season of "happenings" and she had been through all that a dozen
   times, and each one was always billed as the wave of the future, and was
   inevitably a drag. So she didn't go. Ummmm ::::: However :::::

   ::::: In hearing about it from people who did attend, though, she decided
   to go to the next one :::::

   ::::: which was set for Watts, on Lincoln's Birthday, February 12, 1966.
   Watts! the very Watts where hardly five months before the freaking
   revolution of the blacks had broken out, the symbol of all that was
   catastrophic and hopeless in American life, and what is this strange space
   ship now approaching Watts, the very Youth Opportunities center
   itself--Youth Opportunities!--for the trip beyond catastrophe :::::

   ::::: "I think what decided me"-Clair is recalling it for me-"was
   someone's description of Art Kunkin's spontaneous participation and
   enjoyment of the evening in the church. Most of the people there were
   given to improvisation as required, but Arthur and I share a reserve in
   crowds.

   "Anyway. The Watts site-it was actually Compton, an incorporated city on
   the fringe of Watts-was chosen for reasons unknown to me. The best guesses
   I've heard have to do with the politics of taking such a party into the
   recently stricken neighborhood, as a friendship-thing; also a
   humorous-ironical?-site for such carryings-on.

   "The building was a warehouse, part of a Youth Opportunities center, but
   still vacant. They-the Center people-were using or were going to use the
   building as a workshop for manual trades, possibly automotive?
   Job-retraining, etc. It was legally leased for 24 or 48 hours by Kesey's
   group, with money, and the caretaker of the center was present at all
   times during the Acid Test.

   "Announcements were made in the usual way, Free Press and KPFK calendar,
   etc., and around 200 people were in attendance. When I arrived, nothing
   had started ... people were clustered in small groups, sitting on mats and
   blankets around the walls. The room, the main room, was huge ... my
   conception of feet, in yards and such, is bad, but I'd guess maybe 50 by
   25. There was a smaller room to the east and bathroom to the west, and the
   large room had a corridor running along the south wall which had open
   windows waist-high without glass... through which the scene inside could
   be observed.

   "I had driven my car down, giving two people a ride, but I left them
   immediately ... went to join some friends who had some rose wine and were
   sitting on a pad on the floor. As I said, none of the effects had started
   ... but shortly there was an announcement (I think by Neal Cassady, but I
   didn't know him then) that the evening would begin. Films were projected
   on the south wall, with a commentary ... films of Furthur, the bus, the
   people in the bus ... the commentary was a rather dull travelogue and the
   film seemed fairly uninspired and confused.

   "Remember now, I'm a novice. I'd never even been 'high' on 'pot' or any
   kind of pill or anything... my strongest experience had been with alcohol.
   I knew a few 'heads' but didn't think much of the whole thing ... had
   tried pot a few times and nothing impressed me, except for the unpleasant
   taste.

   "This may explain why a lot of people were digging the film, laughing, and
   also why a lot of people were there ... I'm sure that I was one of a
   minority who had no idea what to expect. The word must have been passed,
   but didn't get to me. Also I think a lot of those in attendance had heard
   of Kesey's things and were very aware of what was being done. Not old
   unworldly Clair. Story of my life.

   "The film continued, some slides were shown of flowers and patterns, this
   and that.. . then a large trash can, plastic, was carried to the middle of
   the room, and all were invited to help themselves to the Kool-Aid it
   contained. There was no big rush to the refreshment stand . . . people
   wandered up, it was being served in paper cups, and since Kool-Aid is a
   staple in the homes of Del Close and Hugh Romney and other friends of
   mine, I thought it quite a natural thing to serve . .. had a cup, had
   another, wandered and talked for a while, had another ..."

   . . . Ironically, for Clair, anyway, it was Romney's inspiration to serve
   Electric Kool-Aid, as he called it. They had all... yes... laced it good
   and heavy with LSD. It was a prank, partly, but mainly it was the natural
   culmination of the Acid Tests. It was a gesture, it was sheer generosity
   giving all this acid away, it was truly turning on the world, inviting all
   in to share the Pranksters' ecstasy of the All-one ... all become divine
   vessels in unison, and it is all there in Kool-Aid and a paper cup.
   Cassady immediately drank about a gallon of it. Actually there were two
   cans. Romney took the microphone and said, "This one over here is for the
   little folk and this one over here is for the big folk. This one over here
   is for the kittens and this one over here is for the tigers," and so forth
   and so on. As far as he was concerned, he was doing everything but putting
   a sign on the loaded batch saying LSD. Romney was so thoroughly into the
   pudding himself it never occurred to him that a few simpler souls might
   have wandered into this unlikely way station in Watts and simply not know
   ... or think that all his veiled instructions probably referred to gin,
   like the two crystal bowls of punch at either end of the long white table
   at a wedding reception... or just not hear, like Clair Brush-

   "Severn Darden was there, and Del Close, of course, and I knew them from
   the Second City in Chicago. Severn and I were standing under a strobe
   light (first time I'd seen one, and they are kicky) doing an improvisation
   ... he was a jealous husband, I an unfaithful wife, something simple and
   funny. He was choking me and throwing me around (gently, of course) and
   suddenly I began to laugh ... and laugh ... and the laugh was more
   primitive, more gut-tearing, than anything I had ever known. It came from
   somewhere so deep inside that I had never felt it before ... and it
   continued ... and it was uncontrollable ... and wonderful. Something
   snapped me back and I realized that there was nothing funny ... nothing to
   laugh about.. . what had I been laughing at?

   "I looked around and people's faces were distorted ... lights were
   flashing everywhere ... the screen (sheets) at the end of the room had
   three or four different films on it at once, and the strobe light was
   flashing faster than it had been ... the band, the Grateful Dead, was
   playing but I couldn't hear the music ... people were dancing ... someone
   came up to me and I shut my eyes and with a machine he projected images on
   the back of my eyelids (I really think this happened ... I asked and there
   was such a machine)... and nothing was in perspective, nothing had any
   touch of normalcy or reality ... I was afraid, because I honestly thought
   that it was all in my mind, and that I had finally flipped out.

   "I sought a person I trusted, stopping and asking people what was
   happening. . . mostly they laughed, not believing that I didn't know. I
   found a man I knew not very well but with whom I felt simpatico from the
   first time we met. I asked him what was happening, and if it was all me,
   and he laughed and held me very close and told me that the Kool-Aid had
   been 'spiked' and that I was just beginning my first LSD experience ...
   and not to be afraid, but to neither accept nor reject... to always keep
   open, not to struggle or try to make it stop. He held me for a long time
   and we grew closer than two people can be ... our bones merged, our skin
   was one skin, there was no place where we could separate, where he stopped
   and I began. This closeness is impossible to describe in any but
   melodramatic terms... still, I did feel that we had merged and become one
   in the true sense, that there was nothing that could separate us, and that
   it had meaning beyond anything that had ever been. (Note, a year and two
   months later ... three months ... I later read about 'imprint' and that it
   was possible that we would continue to be meaningful to each other no
   matter what circumstances... I think this is true ... the person in
   question remains very special in my life, and I in his, though we have no
   contact and see each other infrequently ... we share something that will
   last. Oh hell! There's no way to talk about that without sounding goopy.)

   "I wasn't afraid any more and started to look around. The setting for the
   above scene had been the smaller room which was illuminated only by black
   light, which turns people into beautiful color and texture. I saw about
   ten people sitting directly under the black light, which was back-draped
   by a white (luminescent lavender, then) sheet, painting on disembodied
   mannequins with fluorescent paint... and on each other, their clothes,
   etc. I stood under the light and drops of paint fell on my foot and
   sandal, and it was exquisite. I returned to this light frequently ... it
   was peaceful and beautiful beyond description. My skin had depth and
   texture under the light... a velvety purple. I remember wishing it could
   be that color always. (I still do.)

   "There was much activity in the large room. People were dancing and the
   band was playing-but I couldn't hear them. I can't remember a note of the
   music, because the vibrations were so intense. I am music-oriented-sing,
   play instruments, etc.-which is why this seems unusual to me. I stood
   close to the band and let the vibrations engulf me. They started in my
   toes and every inch of me was quivering with them ... they made a journey
   through my nervous system (I remember picturing myself as one of the
   charts we had studied in biology which shows the nerve network), traveling
   each tiny path, finally reaching the top of my head, where they exploded
   in glorious patterns of color and line .. . perhaps like a Steinberg
   cartoon? ... I remember intense colors, but always with black lines ...
   not exactly patterns, but with some outlines and definitions.

   "The strobe light broke midway ... I think they blew something in it...
   but that was a relief, because I had been drawn to it but it disturbed the
   part of me that was trying to hang onto reality ... playing with
   time-sense was something I'd never done ... and I found it irresistible
   but frightening.

   "The Kool-Aid had been served at ten or so. Almost from the first the
   doorway was crowded with people walking in and out, and policemen. There
   were, throughout the evening, at least six different groups of police . ..
   starting with the Compton City police, then the Highway Patrol, sheriffs
   deputies, L.A.P.D. and the vice/narco squad. I seem to remember them in
   groups of five or six, standing just inside the doorway, watching,
   sometimes talking to passers-by, but making no hostile gestures or
   threatening statements. It seems now that they must have realized that
   whatever was going on was more than could be coped with ... and a jail
   full of 150 people on acid was infinitely undesirable ... so they'd look,
   comment, go away, and others would come . . . this continued through the
   night.

   "Dignitaries from the neighborhood attended . . . I'd guess around
   midnight, but I've no sense of the time of any of this, until 6 a.m. or
   so, when I finally sat down (I had walked, danced or stood from 10 p.m.
   on, not wanting to sit down ... for what reason I can't imagine). There
   were two or three women, about seven men. One of the men was dressed in a
   white suit and had a Shriner's cap on-I thought he was Elijah Muhammed.
   They smiled, watched, talked with some of the people ... stayed for about
   half an hour, and left, wishing us a happy evening. No Kool-Aid was in
   evidence at that time, of course ... it had been removed quickly. The
   neighborhood people were Negro, naturally. They seemed to have no idea of
   the party as being anything but a gathering of young people, and appeared
   to be pleased to welcome us to the neighborhood. I remember one of the
   women was carrying a child and many people stooped to play with him ...
   probably a two-year-old boy.

   "The caretaker of the building was present for the whole time. It seems
   he'd go back to the office part and sleep for a while, or maybe just get
   away from the noise and the chaos... but periodically would check to see
   that everything was all right. He was friendly, happy, but very, very
   confused at the strange activities. "Mostly I'd call the Acid Test a
   master production. Everything was very carefully meshed and calculated to
   produce the LSD effect, so that I have no idea where the production
   stopped and my own head took over. The films being shown were so vivid,
   with patterns and details of flowers and trees and often just color
   surrounded by black lines and fast-moving scenery and details of hands and
   such ... again, I avoided getting hung up watching them ...

   "People were standing outside ... it was a cold, clear night... someone
   panicked, got in his car and drove away, burning rubber ... I wanted to go
   back to my house, but knew that driving would be insane. Bonnie (who was
   Hugh Romney's lady) was standing alone ... we touched hands and smiled,
   knowing, caring . . . Furthur was parked in the street. I went alone and
   sat in the bus, and heard and felt the spirits of the people who lived in
   it. . . we (the bus and I) went on a journey through time, and I knew them
   so well... I went back inside and found the man whose face was painted
   half gold and half silver, with a bushy head of curly hair, who had seemed
   earlier to be frightening and strange"-

   -this was Paul Foster-"and looked at him and understood. The costumes of
   the Merry Pranksters had seemed bizarre, and now they were beautiful and
   right. I recalled a poster which we'd had on the ceiling of the Free Press
   when our offices were under : the Fifth Estate ... it's a poster for a
   production of 'The Beard' and has 'Grah roor ograrh ... lion lioness... oh
   grahr ...' (like that) printed on it... and for that moment I understood
   exactly what was being said.

   "A great flash of insight came to me. I've forgotten it now, but there was
   one instant when everything fell into place and made sense, and I said
   aloud, 'Oh, of course!'... why didn't I see all this before, why couldn't
   I have realized all these things and not resisted them so much. That
   didn't last, and hasn't recurred.

   "There was a witch who was very kind and sent out the best warm and lovely
   vibrations. She was wearing red velvet and she's an older lady, really a
   witch in the best possible way. I was glad she was there, and she was
   smiling and understanding and enjoying, mothering those few who were not
   reacting well.

   "There was one girl who was wrestling with God. She was with friends, and
   I think she was all right after a few hours. There was one man who became
   completely withdrawn ... I want to say catatonic, because we tried to
   bring him out of it, and could not make contact at all... he was sort of a
   friend of mine, and I had some responsibility for getting him back to town
   ... he had a previous history of mental hospitals, lack of contact with
   reality, etc., and when I realized what had happened, I begged him not to
   drink the Kool-Aid, but he did ... and it was very bad. These are the only
   two people I know of who did have bad experiences, but I'm sure I wasn't
   in contact with everyone.

   "I told you about the tape recording ('Who cares? ... I don't care ...')
   and how it was used again at the next one. Show biz."

   -Show biz-yesssss-and nooooo-Clair was soaring on LSD, wondering what was
   happening to herself and whether she was going mad, and so forth, and the
   most crazed scream rang out:

   "Who cares!"

   And then: "Ray! ... Ra-a-a-a-ay! .. . Who cares!"

   Not even such a manic scream could have been heard over the general roar
   and rush of the Test ordinarily, over the Grateful Dead wailing, or
   certainly not with such clarity, except for the fact that it was being
   picked up by a microphone and amplified out of huge theater horns-

   "Who cares!"

   That was just the thing for somebody like Clair to hear, Clair who thought
   she was going mad-the sound of a woman freaking out, blowing her mind, all
   of it amplified as if it were tearing out of every gut in the place and up
   through every brain. So Clair's protector and impromptu guide put his arms
   around her again and told her, "It's a tape they made. It's just a put-on.
   Hugh Romney made it." Well, that seemed plausible. Hugh was an actor and a
   great satirist and put-on artist and prankster ... In fact, between
   screams, there was Hugh's voice sure enough, coming over the microphone:

   "Ladies and gentlemen, there's a cop who's come apart in the next room!
   Will somebody go in there and put that cop back together again ! "

   "Ray! Ra-a-a-a-ay!... It's too perfect!"

   Then Romney's voice coming back in: "Does anybody have any tranquilizers?
   There's somebody having a little trouble in the next room."

   The next room was the anteroom off the big hall that Clair had started out
   in. There was a girl in there sitting on the floor and freaking out in the
   most complete way. Just the thing for acid veterans. These things happen,
   what you need is-and Pranksters and other hierophants of the acid world
   heard about the girl sitting in there and screaming. Who cares! and
   freaking out. Norman Hartweg and Romney came in there, and here was a
   fairly pretty girl, if only her face wasn't so contorted, with one
   crippled leg, shrieking Who cares! and Ra-a-a-a-ay. Ray, the very Ray
   himself, and Romney looks at Ray and sees the picture at once. Ray is a
   big guy with a crewcut and a T-shirt and a sleeveless jacket or vest or
   something on, which shows his muscles very well. He looks like some sailor
   who fell in with a bunch of hippies and now he wonders what in the fock
   has happened- "Ray!"

   The worst possible guy in the world to deal with the Who Cares Girl. This
   is a job for experts, and we have them here, some of the greatest acid
   experts in the world, Romney, Norman, the Hassler-he comes in-and here
   comes Babbs-and they're all gathered around her in a
   bunch-Attention!-remember Rachel Rightbred!-and it came to pass!-and they
   give her the freakout expertise: "... don't fight it..."

   "... go with it..."

   "... neither accept nor deny ..."

   ". . . go with the flow . . ."

   "... we're with you ..."

   "... you're in the hands of experts..."

   -experts-and the Pranksters are there rapping over her, riff after riff of
   words-and then Romney got hold of some Thorazine, a tranquilizer that is
   good at aborting bad LSD trips and he says, "Here, take this-"

   -take this-the Who Cares Girl and Ray look at this costumed freak amid a
   group of costumed freaks, all zonked, trying to hand her a capsule of God
   knows what-diabolism-and Ray throws the Thorazine away and the Who Cares
   Girl throws it away, the capsules go skidding across the floor, and the
   Who Cares Girl goes:

   harruummmppparummmparrrrumppparruuuuuuumparum pauharuharummmpa mumbling
   along, drifting in and out of the freakout, giggling for a stretch and
   they say ah she's coming out of it and then:

   "Who cares! ... Ray! ... Ra-a-a-a-ay! ... Oh, what's the use! ... Sex! ...
   Ray! Sex! ... Who cares!"

   That phrase!-it sticks in Romney's head. He can't get it out. Her scream
   shrieks over the hall, because now Babbs has brought up the microphone and
   holds it near her, right in front of Ray, solicitously, like this will do
   it. Ray's head sprockets around inanely. Babbs is getting it all over the
   microphone to make it part of the test-not an isolated event-but All-one,
   anachoretic freak-out-Who cares! Romney looks at Babbs and Who
   cares!-well, Babbs cares, with one part of him, but with another his
   devotion is to the Test, to the Archives, a freakout for the Archives,
   freaked out on tape in the Archives, Who Cares in the Prankster Archives,
   and the cry wails over the hall, into every brain, including Clair's-

   Romney can't get this insane cry out of his head, Who cares, and it
   becomes the Who Cares Test for him, and he is back at the microphone, with
   his mission now, his voice furrowing into the microphone:

   "Listen, this girl's brains are coming out! and who cares? This girl's
   coming apart! and who cares? This girl's breaking up into crispy chips!
   and who cares? This girl's caked in the dust, nylon wall-to-wall on her
   eyeballs! and who cares?"

   -and it was very clear. Everybody who cared would do something, pour on
   the Energy if nothing else, bleed Dimensional Kreemo for her, if they
   truly cared. It became a test for Romney, he could feel it, to find the
   depths of how much he cared-

   Who cares! she shrieks

   He cares! he feels it, and feels himself growing-

   -while the tapes reel it all in.

   FINALLY, EVEN AT THE WATTS TEST THEY WEAR DOWN, AND those who are not into
   the pudding begin to drift off, and the Prankster diehards and a few
   discoverers like Clair Brush are still there, and Norman can tell it is
   coming, the magic hour, and Hassler gets up in a blue pageboy costume and
   does a funny beautiful slow dance to the music that is just perfect... and
   Page is working behind him with the projectors, the film projectors and
   the slide projectors, and he sets up a really kind of gorgeous collage,
   moving projections on top of still projections ... and the Pranksters sit
   amazed and delighted and he makes slow changes, abstract patterns and
   projections from the slides and... it all fits together. . . everything ..
   .

   About 6 a.m., more cops, narcos now, six in plainclothes-and one of the
   diehard three-o'clock discoverers walks up to them and announces with a
   look of total acid-stoned glistening sincerity:

   "Listen, I've got more Awareness, more ... Awareness, in my little
   fingernail... My Awareness is so superior to yours that... uh ..
   ."-obviously from the glistening strain on his face, there is no metaphor,
   no conceit, that can be concocted in the English language that is enormous
   enough to express just how superior, and so his face falls back into a
   sweet sincere look, slightly played out, and he says: "How about getting
   us some cigarettes? We're all out."

   Strangely, one of them did and returned very quickly with a carton of
   Kools, which he passed around. Around 9 a.m. only the Pranksters, Clair
   and a few others are still around-and more cops-and finally they say to
   Babbs that he ought to get everybody out now, the L.A. sun is up, the good
   spades of Watts are going to work ... and the Pranksters troop out into
   the L.A. sunlight, the Devil with an orange face with silver stars, a tall
   wild-haired guy with half his face silver and half gold, Day-Glo crazies
   trooping out into the sunlight at 9 a.m. out of the chilled Pandemonium
   hatchery ...

   And Clair Brush: "It seems that's about it... I've rambled incredibly ...
   Did it last? Am I different? I can't remember. It seems so, but I am not
   sure. When I get under black light, or a strobe, it comes back vividly ...

   "Del Close told me later I was wandering around looking 'wonderful... in
   the sense of full of wonder.' That's the best description I can imagine.

   "I've taken LSD twice since then. Each time was different and much less
   dramatic, more personal, milder. The only strong similarity is the
   physical effect, which, for me, consists of contractions quite like labor
   pains and a quivering of the nerve-endings ... anticipatory ... for
   prolonged periods, the feelings of being on the verge of orgasm without
   any contact at all... these things occurred all three times. Otherwise,
   all have been different.

   "Take it again? Oh, probably someday ... but no urgency, no desire to run
   to my friendly corner pusher. I think the best way is to take it with a
   lover, but someone you're willing to have live in your head for a long,
   long time. Not too many of those around. It's a closeness not easily
   dismissed. "All, all. Enough, I hope."

                                     * * *

   ABOUT 1 P.M. THE PHONE STARTS RINGING IN ROMNEY's apartment, waking him
   up: "Romney, you guys ought to be shot!..." "Seven people committed!"...
   "Freaked out!"... "Atrocity!" And finally one from the L.A. police:

   "Are you Romney? Listen, we got some two-tone dude down here-"

   Oh, the Di-men-sion-al Kree-mo ... That would be Paul Foster. Four, five,
   six hundred people had been in that madhouse all night long having a
   goddamned orgy for themselves-and the cops couldn't lay a hand on them.
   So-in the sour-milk L.A. sunlight of 9 a.m. they had seen this gangling
   character rocking away from the building like a Druid, half his face gold,
   the other half silver, so they busted the mother, for being . . . well. .
   . drunk in public, or something equally likely. But by 1 p.m. they wish to
   hell somebody would come pick up this two-tone dude ...

   Christ, man! It's too much for us even! We wash our hands of this :::::
   Atrocity :::::

   ::::: what... exactly have we done? and :::::

   ::::: even to some Pranksters, the anti-Babbs faction, the Test was a
   debacle. They doubted the ethics of springing the acid in the Kool-Aid, on
   the one hand, and thought the treatment of the Who Cares Girl, piping her
   freakout over the speakers, was cruel. Shortly after they got back to L.A.
   from La Jolla, the Schism broke out true and rife, out front. This was a
   great little Morbio Inferiore all its own, the Life Magazine Divide.

   The Watts Test in L.A., coming on top of the Trips Festival in San
   Francisco, had caused the fast-rising psychedelic thing to explode right
   out of the underground in a way nobody had dreamed of. Leary and Alpert
   and their experiments had had plenty of publicity, but that seemed like a
   fairly isolated thing with a couple of Harvard docs at the helm and being
   pretty solemn-faced and esoteric about it, all in all. This new San
   Francisco-L.A. LSD thing, with wacked-out kids and delirious rock 'n'
   roll, made it seem like the dread LSD had caught on like an infection
   among the youth-which, in fact, it had. Very few realized that it had all
   emanated from one electric source: Kesey and the Merry Pranksters.

   A team from Life magazine turned up, led by a photographer, Larry
   Schiller, who was on to the LSD world and had taken the pictures at the
   Hollywood Test. They interviewed the Pranksters and took pictures and said
   they were going to do a big spread on the acid scene and, they hoped, put
   the Pranksters on the cover. So they hailed the bus on over to a big photo
   studio and Schiller convened them all. Then-Babbs refused to go in. But
   the rest of them, Norman, Hagen, Cassady, a whole flock of them, went on
   in, and Schiller took a lot of pictures. To Norman it seemed square. For
   one thing, the guy was working in black and white, and the most obvious
   thing about the Pranksters was color, Day-Glo, the brighter the better,
   the more vibrations the better. Then Schiller had them all sit down in a
   group, against a black background, and in the middle they had Cassady
   stand up and wave his arms up and down like a crow. He took the pictures
   in strobe, and this would make Cassady look like he had multi-arms, like
   the great god Shiva. This strobe thing was at the time new in psychedelic
   photography, and the mass media would never tire of it. Recreates the acid
   experience, etc. Then Schiller told certain people to stay around for
   individual shots, colorful characters like Cassady, and Paul Foster with
   his wild mutton chops and Importancy Coat, and Norman, maybe because he
   had a beard. The usual... The others went on outside where Babbs was.
   Finally they all left, the ones who had stayed for the individual shots,
   and when they got outside, the bus was gone. Clean gone. Babbs, Mountain
   Girl, Zonker, Walker, and the others-split.

   Hagen couldn't believe it. "Why-we've been pranked!" he said.

   Pranksters-and the Pranked.

   Things being like they were to begin with, the prank took on fundamental
   meaning. Those who got pranked finally made their way back to the
   moldering Sans Souci, and Babbs & Co. had cleared out of there, too,
   taking all the money and the food. Babbs left word that they, the inner
   nucleus, were going off to hold a Test of their own and would rejoin the
   Satellites for the UCLA Acid Test, scheduled for March 19. "The great idea
   still kept us together"-and Norman, Cassady, Hagen, Paul Foster, Roy
   Seburn, Marge and a couple others made a stab at preparing for the UCLA
   Test. But UCLA backed out of the deal because of the notoriety after the
   Watts Test, and that did it. All began drifting off. It was a strange time
   and a strange feeling. Nobody could figure why Babbs had pranked Cassady;
   the others maybe--although that Hagen would get pranked was pretty
   strange, too-but Cassady-that was unbelievable.

   Cassady said fuck it and headed for San Francisco. Norman and Paul Foster
   went to stay at Hugh Romney's. Then by and by Norman got a chance to go to
   New York with Marge the Barge and Evan Engber, so they headed east by car.

   "HARDLY HAD LEO LEFT US, WHEN FAITH AND CONCORD amongst us was at an end;
   it was as if the life-blood of our group flowed away from an invisible
   wound."

   One day Paul Foster cranked up the great God Rotor and sat down and worked
   on a very intricate illuminated billhead. When he got through, there was
   an ornate black border, and in the middle the words

                                  In Memoriam

   in florid Old English lettering, and at the bottom: January 23, 1966, the
   day Kesey disappeared. Nothing else, just In Memoriam and the date. He
   hung it up on the wall.

                                    chapter

                                      XXI

                                  The Fugitive

   HAUL ASS, KESEY. MOVE. SCRAM. SPLIT FLEE HIDE VANISH DISINTE-grate. Like
   run.

   Rrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrevrevrevrevrevrevrevrevrevrev or are we gonna have
   just a late Mexican re-run of the scene on the rooftop in San Francisco
   and sit here with the motor spinning and watch with fascination while the
   cops they climb up once again to come git you-

   They just opened the door down below, Rotor Rooter, so

   YOU HAVE MAYBE 45 SECONDS ASSUMING THEY BE SLOW AND SNEAKY AND SURE ABOUT
   IT

   Kesey sits in a little upper room in the last house down the beach, $80 a
   month, on paradise-blue Bandarias Bay, in Puerto Vallarta, on the west
   coast of Mexico, state of Jalisco, one step from the floppy green fronds
   of the jungle, wherein flourish lush steamy baboon lusts of paranoia-Kesey
   sits in this little rickety upper room with his elbow on a table and his
   forearm standing up perpendicular and in the palm of his hand a little
   mirror, so that his forearm and the mirror are like a big rear-view mirror
   stanchion on the side of a truck and thus he can look out the window and
   see them but they can't see him-

   Come on, man, do you need a copy of the script to see how THIS MOVIE GOES?
   You HAVE MAYBE 40 SECONDS LEFT BEFORE THEY COME GET YOU

   -a Volkswagen has been cruising up and down the street for no earthly
   reason at all, except that they are obviously working with the fake
   telephone linesmen outside the window who whistle-

   There they go again

   -whistle in the slow-brain brown Mexican huarache day-laborer way, for no
   earthly reason except that they are obviously synched in, finked in, with
   the Volkswagen. Now a tan sedan comes along the street, minus a license
   plate but plus a stenciled white number-exactly like a prison
   stencil-police and two coat-less guys inside, both in white shirts so
   they're not prisoners-

   one turned looked back !

   If you were watching all this on a movie screen you know  what your
   reaction would be through a mouthful of popcorn from the third row: "what
   more do you need, you dolt! Scream outta there ..."

   -But he has just hooked down five dexedrines and the old motor is spinning
   and rushing most nice and euphorically in fascination and a man can't
   depart this nice $80-a-month snug harbor on paradise-blue Bandarias Bay
   just yet with a cool creek of speed rush in his veins. It is such a tiny
   little fink scene as he sees it in the hand mirror. He can tilt it and see
   his own face entropied with the strain and then tilt it-a sign!-a sparrow,
   fat and sleek, dives through the dwindling sun into a hole in one of the
   lampposts; home.

   More telefono trucks! Two loud whistles this time-for no earthly reason
   except to come git you. You have maybe 35 seconds left

   -Kesey has Cornel Wilde Running Jacket ready hanging on the wall, a
   jungle-jim corduroy jacket stashed with fishing line, a knife, money, DDT,
   tablet, ball-points, flashlight, and grass. Has it timed by test runs that
   he can be out the window, down through a hole in the roof below, down a
   drain pipe, over a wall and into thickest jungle in 45 seconds-well, only
   35 seconds left, but head start is all that's needed, with the element of
   surprise. Besides, it's so fascinating to be here in subastral projection
   with the cool rushing dex, synched into their minds and his own, in all
   its surges and tributaries and convolutions, turning it this way and that
   and rationalizing the situation for the 100th time in split seconds, such
   as: If they have that many men already here, the phony telephone men, the
   cops in the tan car, the cops in the Volkswagen, what are they waiting
   for? why haven't they crashed right in through the rotten doors of this
   Rat building- But he gets the signal even before he finishes the question:

   Waiting! They know they've got you, fool, have known for weeks. But
   they're certain you're connected with all the lsd being smuggled up from
   mexico and they want to take in as big a haul as possible when they
   finally slam it. Like Leary; they must have been watching a dreadful long
   time before they were content they had something worth his size. Thirty
   years. For a Harvard doctor with grass. That's how bad they wanted the
   whole business locked away. That's how dangerous they consider the whole
   business. And they were completely correct - if not in their fantasy, then
   at least in their evaluation of the present and ever-growing psychedelic
   threat

   a noise down below.

   Them?

   30 segundos left?

   -maybe it's Black Maria, come back with good things for eating and stuff
   for the new disguise, Steve Lamb, mild-mannered reporter and all-around
   creep-

   Run, fool!

   -Shhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh. Such a quiet secret muffled smile will be on Black
   Maria's face.

   Rrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrevrevrevrevrevrevrevrevrevrev It could have been all so
   quiet, just him and Zonker and the smoldering Black Maria in this
   $80-a-month paradise-blue Bandarias Bay in Puerto Vallarta. If the suicide
   ruse and the rest of the main Fugitive fantasy had but worked.

   The trip into Mexico was easy, because everything with Boise was easy.
   Boise always knew. They picked up Zonker in L.A., and then Jim Fish, and
   they coasted on over the line at Tijuana. No hassle to cross over into
   Mexico. The border at Tijuana is like a huge superhighway toll station, a
   huge concrete apron and ten or fifteen customs booths in a row for all the
   cars pouring over into Tijuana from San Diego and points north, all
   plastic green and concrete like part of suburban superhighway America. So
   they rolled on over the line with Kesey hidden in the back of Boise's old
   panel truck and heart don't even thump too bad. Spirits up, a little of
   the Prankster elan back in the cosmos. In true Prankster fashion they
   spent one third their money stash on a Madman Muntz autostereo rig to go
   along with all the other valuables, like tape recorders and many tapes.

   The next likely hassle is visas, because this shapes up as a long stay.
   Might be hot to try to get Kesey one in Tijuana, because Tijuana is just a
   California annex, really, the slums of San Diego, and they just might very
   well know about the case.

   "We'll do it in Sonoita, man," says Boise. "They don't give a shit there.
   Put down a couple of bucks and they can't see anything else."

   Sonoita is almost due east of Tijuana, just south of the Arizona border.
   Kesey uses his good shuck ID there and all is jake in Sonoita.
   Fugitive!-real-life and for sure now.

   Then south down so-called Route 2 and so-called Route 15, bouncing and
   grinding along through the brown dust and scrawny chickens and animal dung
   brown dust fumes of western Mexico, towns of Coyote, Caborca, Santa Ana,
   Querobabi, Cornelio, El Oasis, hee, Hermosillo, hah, Pocitos Casas,
   Cieneguito, Guaymas, Camaxtli, Mixcoatl, Tlazolteotl, Quetzalcoatl,
   Huitzilopochtli, Tezcatlipoca haunting the Dairy Queen Rat Queen
   crossroads in the guise of a Rat, a Popoluactli-screeing rat, Tetzcotl,
   Yaotl, Titlacahuan he whose slaves we are, Ochpaniiztl priesty
   Angel-freaked out in a motorcycle made from the vaseline skin of Gang Bang
   Girl Meets White Trash ... A confetti of skulls and death in western
   Mexico, the Rat lands. Not one inch of it is picturesque burros and shawls
   or nova Zapata hats or color-TV pink chunks of watermelon or water lilies
   or gold feathers or long eyelashes or high combs or tortillas and tacos
   and chili powder or fluty camote vendors or muletas or toreros or oles or
   mariachi bands or water lilies or blood of the dahlia or tinny cantinas or
   serapes or movie black marias with shiny black hair and steaming little
   high round pubescent bottoms. None of the old Mexico we know and love on
   the 21-day excursion fare. Just the boogering brown dust and bloated rat
   corpses by the road, goats, cows, chickens with all four feet up in the
   air at the Tezcatlipocan skull rot crossroads of Mexico.

   To Kesey it was a hopeless flea-bitten desert he was fleeing into. But
   Boise made it bearable. Boise always knew. Boise was wizened and
   thin-faced and he had the awfulest New England high flat whine, and he
   didn't belong anywhere near here, but he was here, now, and he knew. The
   truck breaks down for the fourteenth time-

   "No hassle, man. We just back it up on a rock, man ... Then we just take
   the tire off and fix it."

   More flat, Rat country, mosquito and flea, into total nothing, like the
   lines of perspective in a surrealist painting, but Boise makes you realize
   it is all the same, here as anywhere. Boise lecherously scanning the
   streets as they bounce through the dead chicken towns just like it was
   only Saturday night on Broadway in North Beach, spotting a good looking
   gringa muchacha padding along the side of the road with honest calves,

   25 SECONDS LEFT, FOOL!

   and he says, "Shall we get her over and ball her, man?" all in the same
   New England whine, as if he were saying, Wanna Coke, or not? Kesey looks
   at Boise's lined face and his thin lips, looks ancient, only a glitter
   comes out of the eyes, nice and lecherous, dead certain and crazy alive at
   the same time. And Boise in that moment is in the tiny knot of Perfect
   Pranksters, the inner circle, ascending into the sangha for good.

   In Guaymas, on the gulf, Jim Fish wants out. An early attack of paranoia,
   Jim Fish? and catches a bus back to the U.S., leaving Kesey, Boise and
   Zonker and the equipment. But was it not ever so? You're either on the bus
   or off the bus. Kesey's spirits were picking up. Boise was pulling
   everything together ::: this crazy New Englander is here in these Rat
   lands.

   "Hey, man ..." Boise points at a construction scene they're going by. "...
   see that?" as if to say, There's the whole thing, right there.

   A whole gang of workmen are trying to put the stucco on the ceiling of a
   building they're finishing up. One fat man is mixing up the stucco in a
   washtub. One skinny one is scooping the stucco up out of the tub with a
   little trowel and pitching it up underhanded at the ceiling. A little of
   it sticks-and three or four guys stand on a plank scaffolding taking stabs
   at smoothing it out-but most of it falls down on the floor and three or
   four more are hunkered down there scraping it up off the floor and
   shoveling it back in the tub and the skinny guy skinnies up another little
   gob with his skinny trowel and they all stare again to see what happens.
   They are all hunkering around in huaraches, worthless flat Rat woven
   sandals, up on the scaffolding, down on the floor, waiting to see what
   happens, how fate brings it off with this little gob of nothing pitched up
   at the Rat expanse .. .

   And it's all there-the whole Mexico Trip-

   "They have a saying, 'Hay tiemp-' " Boise hooks the steering wheel to get
   around an ice-cream vendor in the middle of the road " '-o,' 'There is
   time.' "

   20 SECONDS, IDIOT!

   Huaraches, which are the Rat shoe. It all synches. Mexico is the Rat
   paradise. But of course! It is not worthless-it is perfection. It is as if
   the Rat things of all the Rat lands of America, all the drive-ins,
   mobile-home parks, Dairy Queens, superettes, Sunset Strips, auto-accessory
   stores, septic-tank developments, souvenir shops, snack bars, lay-away
   furniture stores, Daveniter living rooms, hot-plate hotels, bus-station
   paperback racks, luncheonette in-the-booth jukebox slots, raw-concrete
   service-station toilets with a head of urine in the bowl, Greyhound bus
   toilettes with paper towels and vomit hanging over the hockey-puckblack
   rim, Army-Navy stores with Bikini Kodpiece Briefs for men, Super Giant
   racks with matching green twill shirts and balloon-bottom pants for honest
   toilers, $8,000 bungalows with plastic accordion-folding partitions and
   the baby asleep in there in a foldaway crib of plastic net, picnic tables
   with the benches built onto them used in the dining room, Jonni-Trot
   Bar-B-Q sandwiches with a carbonated fruit drink, aluminum slat awnings,
   aluminum sidings, lukewarm coffee-"with" in a china mug with a pale brown
   pool in the saucer and a few ashes, a spade counter chef scraping a
   short-order grill with a chalky Kitchy-Brik and he won't take your order
   till he's through, a first-come-first-serve doctor's waiting room with
   modest charwomen with their dresses stuck on the seats of shiny vinyl
   chairs and they won't move to get loose for fear you'll look Up their
   dress, plaid car coats from Sears and a canvas cap with a bill, synthetic
   dresses for waitresses looking like milky cellophane, Rat cones, Rat
   sodas, Rat meat-salad sandwiches, Rat cheezis, Rat-burgers-it is as if the
   Rat things of all the Rat lands of America had been looking for their
   country, their Canaan, their Is-ra-el, and they found it in Mexico. It has
   its own Rat aesthetic. It's hulking beautiful...

   Then they reached Mazatlan, the first full-fledged resort you reach on the
   west coast of Mexico, coming down from the States. Everybody's trip was
   fishing in Mazatlan. Along the old Avenida

   del Mar and the Paseo Claussen, white walls with nice artistic Rat fishing
   scenes and hotel archways with great shiny blue martins hanging inside the
   arches and gringos with duckbill caps here to catch some marlin. Mariachi
   music at last, with the trumpets always breaking and dropping off the note
   and then struggling up again. Zonker has the bright idea of going to
   O'Brien's Bar, on the beach front, place he got beat up out back of once
   by thirteen Mexican fags. Zonker enjoys revisiting scenes of previous
   debacles. Like also spends hours on the beach telling them how his true
   and fiercest fear is of being attacked by a shark while swimming . . . as
   he picks flea-bite scabs until his legs stream blood to the luscious
   world. . . then goes swimming.

   O'Brien's brings on the paranoia right away. It is a break in the Rat
   movie. It is dark and a Mexican band plays-signaling to the Rat
   sensibility that it will cost too much. Rat souls everywhere fear dark,
   picturesque restaurant, knowing instinctively they will pay dearly for the
   bullshit ambiance, dollar a drink probably. O'Brien's was crowded, and
   then through the cocktail gloom: heads. A bunch of kids with the
   jesuschrist hair, the temple bells and donkey beads, serape vests,
   mandalas; in short, American heads. Zonker recognizes them immediately.
   They're not only American heads, but from San Jose, and some had been to
   the Acid Tests. Just what the Fugitive needs to blow the whole suicide
   ruse. "Guess who I saw in Mexico..." Naturally, Zonk, with his zest for
   debacle, hails them over. Kesey is introduced as "Joe," and nobody pays
   him much mind except for one dark little girl, Mexican-looking, with long
   black hair.

   "When were you born?" she says to Kesey. She doesn't sound Mexican. She
   sounds like Lauren Bacall speaking through a tube.

   "I'm a Virgo." No sense hitting a ball three bits you can see coming if
   you can cut across the fourth.

   "I thought so. I'm a Scorpio."

   "Beautiful."

   The black Scorpio obviously knows Zonk best. She knows him when. But Zonk
   belongs to the ages and it comes to pass that Zonk or no Zonk, she and
   Kesey relax out in the open air on the pier one night down by a Mazatlan
   Rat beach, all dirt and scrabble, but the waves and the wind and the
   harbor lights do it up right and the moon hits some kind of concrete shaft
   there, putting her in the dark, in the shadow, and him in the light, lit
   up by the moon, as if some designer drew a line precisely between their
   bodies. Blacky Maria, he decides.

   So Black Maria joins the Fugitive band and they go off to Puerto Vallarta.
   Puerto Vallarta is out of the Rat lands. All picture-book Mexico.
   Paradise-blue Bandarias Bay and a pure white beach and white latino
   collages right up against the jungle, which is a deep raw green, and
   clean. Fat green fronds lapping up against the back of the houses on the
   beach. Macaw sounds, or very near it. Secret poisonous orchid and orange
   pops and petals winking out when the foliage moves. A nice romantic Gothic
   jungle. Zonker hassles with an oily little real-estate man and gets the
   last house on the edge of town for $80 a month. The rent is low because
   the jungle is too close for the tourists, the jungle and too many Mexican
   kids and chickens and the rural dung dust. Boise heads back to the U.S.
   and Kesey, Zonker and Black Maria move in. They have the upper half of the
   house, one floor and a spiral staircase up to the roof. Up on the roof is
   a kind of thatched hut, the highest perch around, a perfect lookout post
   and a snug harbor. Kesey decides to risk a phone call to the States to let
   Faye and everybody know he's O.K. He goes into town and calls Peter Demma
   in the Hip Pocket Book Store in Santa Cruz. A little metallic clanking
   about by the telefonista senoritas down at central. And then,

   "Peter?"

   From many Rat miles away: "Ken!" Very surprised, naturally ...

   So Kesey whiled the time sitting in the snug hacienda on the edge of
   Puerto Vallarta sipping beer and smoking many joints

   and writing in a notebook occasionally. He wanted to get a little of all
   this down and send ii to Larry McMurtry.

   "Larry:

   "Phone calls to the states eight bucks apiece besides was ever a good
   board to bound my favorite ball of bullshit prose offen, it was you ..."

   Like all about Black Maria. In many ways she was so great. She is quiet
   and has a kind of broody beauty. She cooks. She looks Mex and speaks Mex.
   She can even hassle Mex. She sounds out the Mayor of Puerto Vallarta as to
   how safe Kesey will be here in town. Hay tiempo, he says. The extradition
   takes forever. Very nice to know . ..

   And yet Black Maria is not completely a Prankster. She wants to be a part
   of all this, she wants to do this thing, but she does it without belief.
   It is like the Mexican part of her Black Maria thing. She has all the
   trappings of Mexican-she looks it, she speaks it, her grandfather was even
   Mexican-but she is not Mexican. She is Carolyn Hannah of San Jose,
   California, under everything else, even the blood. He wrote in the
   notebook::Meving the dark Indian

   10 SECONDS LEFT, YOU FREAKING EE-JOT! ! ! !

   body out of the Indian land weakened the Indian blood with chicken soup
   and matzoh balls. So much of the fire concealed by the dark and broody
   beauty lies just that deep. Because she does it without belief. And yet it
   is very nice up here in this thatched perch atop the last house. A car
   heads up the street-Zonker and Black Maria coming back to the house. He
   peers over the edge at the car kicking up the dust, then writes in the
   notebook, it is a perfect lookout, allowing me to see them, without them
   seeing me. Many things. .. synch.

   ZONKER AND BLACK MARIA DROVE DOWN THE ROAD, Scattering up the kids and the
   chickens and the dust, and Black Maria pointed up to the top of the house
   and said to Zonker:

   "Look, there's Kesey." Then she looked out the window and stared at the
   jungle. "I bet he thinks we can't see him."

   THE JIG IS UP. ZONKER BRINGS A TELEGRAM FROM PAUL Robertson back in San
   Jose and it is a bear. It is not even a warning, it

   5 SECONDS - 5 SECONDS LEFT - YOU REALLY JES GON' SIT THERE FOR THE SQUASH?

   is final. The jig is up, is says. Meaning, it turned out, that the suicide
   ruse had been exposed and the cops knew he was in Puerto Vallarta.
   Exposed?-hell, the suicide prank had turned into a goddamn comic opera.
   For a start, Dee had pulled a sort of Dee-out, as Mountain Girl feared.
   Dee had driven up looking for a cliff near Humboldt Bay, about 250 miles
   north of San Francisco, up near Eureka, California, not far from the
   Oregon border in redwoods country. He got up to the last hill going up
   there and the panel truck wouldn't pull the hill. So he called into town
   for a tow truck and the garage man and the tow truck pulled the suicide
   vehicle up the last mile. Hired and paid for and thanks a lot. Always nice
   to hire some help to commit suicide. Next Dee dropped Kesey's distinctive
   sky-blue boots down to the shore below-but they hit the water instead and
   sank without a bubble. Next, the goddamned romantic suicide desolate
   foaming cliff was so goddamned desolate, nobody noticed the truck for
   about two weeks, despite the Ira Sandperl for President sign on the rear
   bumper. Apparently people figured the old heap had been abandoned. The
   Humboldt county police finally checked it out on February 11. Next, the
   suicide note, which seemed so ineluctably convincing as Kesey and Mountain
   Girl smoked a few joints and

   soared into passages of Shelleyan Weltschmerz-it gave off a giddy scent of
   put-on, even to the straight cops of the Humboldt. There were certain
   inconsistencies. Like the part about the truck smashing into a redwood.
   Well-even in a Dee-out, Dee couldn't exactly ask the tow-truck man, Well,
   now that you've towed it up here, how about jamming it into a tree for me.
   Demma had really been bowled over to hear from Kesey. A lot of people, a
   lot of people who liked him, had really been worried that he was dead. And
   now here was Kesey calling him-alive-with a message for Faye and the whole
   thing. That was Saturday. The next night, Sunday, February 13, Demma
   dropped into Manuel's Mexican Restaurant in Santa Cruz, and there was his
   old friend Bob Levy. By way of making conversation, Levy says,

   "What have you heard from Ken?"

   "I just got a call from him!" says Demma. "From Puerto Vallarta!"

   That's interesting.

   Levy happened to be a reporter for the Watsonville Register-Pajaronian,
   Watsonville being a town near Santa Cruz. The next afternoon, Monday, the
   lead story in the Watsonville Register-Pajaronian carried a five-column
   headline reading:

                      MISSING NOVELIST TURNS UP IN MEXICO

   The next day, Tuesday, the San Jose Mercury picked up the story and put a
   little more spin on it with a story headlined:

                Kesey's corpse having a ball in puerto vallarta

   2 seconds, oh corpse of mine!

   That's no Black Maria shhhhhhhhuffling up the stairs

   outside

   the door, dolt, it's a cop clump up the stairs no earthly  Sound like it

   Sharp whistle from the telefonistas

   vw backing down the street

   This is truly it, truly it

   Grab the Cornel Wilde running jacket, fool! Make the brain catch hold!
   Rrrrrrrrrrrrrrrevrevrevrev spinning AND IN THE GIANT PYRAMIDAL CELLS OF
   BeTZ OF PRE-CENTRAL CEREBRAL CORTEX RISE AND HEAVE AND SLIP GANGLIONIC
   LAYER SHUDDERS AND GIGGLES SYNAPSES LIGHT LIKE RANDOM BEATLE FLASHBULBS
   KHEEWWW BLASTING OUT SILLY FROM MOTOR HO-MUNCULUS YOU MISSED YR FLASH Oh
   MIGHTY MASTICATOR, salivator, vocalizer, swallower, licker, biter sucker
   brow-knitter looker blinker rubbernecker thumber prodder up-yours fingerer
   ringwearer nosepicker waver drinker armlifter bodybender hipswiveler kneer
   springer runner zero::::::::ooooooooo:::::::: run!

   Sonbitch! The gears catch at last, he springs up, grabs Cornel Wilde
   jacket, leaps through the back window, down through the hole, down the
   drainpipe-now vault the wall, you mother, into the jungle floppy-

   Awwrrrrrammmmannnnnnn

   Whazzat?

   His head is down but he can see it

   Whazzat !

   Up there in the window he just jumped out of

   Brown !

   He can feel it. There is a vibration on the parasympathetic efferent
   fibres behind the eyeballs and it hums

   Hrrrrrrrrrmannnnnnnnnnn

   Two of them one brown dumpy Mex with gold-handle butt gun one crewcut
   American FBI body-snatcher watching him flying like a monkey over the wall
   into the jungle the brown Mex holds gold gun but the brain behind that
   face too brown moldering Mex earth to worry about couldn't hit a peeing
   dog

   plunge

   into the lapping P.V. fronds bursting orchid and orange the motor
   homunculus working perfect now powerful gallop into the picturebook
   jungles of Mexico-

   A MOMENT LATER BLACK MARIA WALKED INTO THE Apartment. She found Kesey gone
   and the Cornel Wilde jungle running jacket gone. That trip again. Well,
   he'll come back when he's ready to, worn out, and things will be cool for
   a while. Kesey had gotten paranoid as hell, but that wasn't the only
   thing. He liked this Fugitive game. Man, he'd scram out in the jungle and
   hide out there for two or three days and smoke a lot of grass and finally
   straggle in. That started before the telegram even. There was a whole
   signal they worked out. Or he worked out. When the coast was clear, she
   was supposed to hang up a yellow shirt of Zonk's on the line outside the
   back window, facing the jungle. It was a yellow shirt with a black and
   brown print on it, on the faggy side, if you asked Black Maria. The flag
   would go up and finally Kesey would straggle back home beat, having run
   himself about to death in the jungle or along the beach.

   And yet it was nice. It was crazy but nice. Kesey was the most magnetic
   person she had ever met. He radiated something, a kind of power. His
   thoughts, the things he talked about, were very complex and metaphysical
   and cryptic but his manner was back-home, almost back-country. Even while
   he was reeking with paranoia, he seemed to have total confidence. That was
   very strange. He could make you feel like part of something very ... He
   had even given her a new name, Black Maria. She was. .. Black Maria.

   As a girl in San Jose, California, she had felt like everything she really
   was had been smothered under layers and layers of games she couldn't
   control. Externally there was nothing wrong. Her father and mother were
   both teachers and life in San Jose was comfortable and serene in the
   California suburban manner. But half the time nobody ever understands
   about growing up in this country. Little Penguin Islands full of kids
   playing Lord of the Flies, a world of pygmy tribes, invisible to the
   Isfahan adult eye, these little devils, tribes of studs, tribes of rakes,
   tribes of IntelFinks even, tribes of greasers, and an amorphous mass of
   hopeless cases left over. Until-psychedelics started around there, mainly
   grass and acid. The new scene started and suddenly all sorts of. . . well,
   beautiful people blossomed forth from out of the polyglot, people who
   really had a lot to them, only it had been smothered by all the eternal
   social games that had been set up. Suddenly they found each other.

   One night she was high and experienced the unity, the All-one. A light was
   behind her in the room and hit her body from behind and broke up into
   beams and shone out before her, hitting the floor and the walls in spokes
   of light with shadows in between. The room broke up before her eyes and
   separated in just that pattern with bars of light vibrating. Suddenly it
   became very clear, the way the room was put together, the way the parts
   fit, the way the parts of everything fit, as if someone had taken an
   Indian puzzle ring apart for her. It was clear how everything fit together
   and it wasn't really a world split up into pointless games and cliques.
   That was merely the way it looked before you knew the key. And now there
   were beautiful people who knew the key and this experience could be
   shared.

   Her mother gave her money for the second semester at San Jose State, and
   although it would hurt her mother at first, she knew what she had to do.
   She took the money and headed off to Mexico with some beautiful kids. It
   was a little more complicated than that. She knew Zonk at San Jose State
   and she knew he was heading for Mexico, for Mazatlan, although she didn't
   know about the Kesey prank, and so she was following Zonk, for if there
   were beautiful people, Zonk was one of them.

   Mazatlan was just beginning to be the acid heads' favorite spot on the
   Mexican west coast. It wasn't a place the real hard-core tourists were
   onto yet. They went on down the coast to Acapulco, generally. At the same
   time Mazatlan wasn't so unbearably Mexicali... sad... like the true Acid
   Central of Mexico, Ajijic, on Lake Chapala. Those poor sad Lake Chapala
   villages, Ajijic, Chapala, Jocotepec, with the lake drying up and the old
   suck-smack lily-pad scum mud showing and failed American aesthetes padding
   around earnestly in sandals, 48-year-old bohos sucking up to young heads
   of the new generation of Hip. Very sad. It is truly a sad thing when an
   American boho says fuck this and picks up and leaves this fucking tailfin
   and shopping plaza and war-crazy civilization and goes to live among real
   people, the honest folk-type folk, in the land of Earth feelings, Mexico,
   and the hell with tile baths-and then he sits there, in Mexico, amid the
   hunkering hardcheese mestizos, and, man, it is honest and real here .. .
   and just as miserable as hell, and he is a miserable aging fuckup with no
   place else to go.

   But Mazatlan-the head scene there was a happy thing and a groove. So she
   sat down in Mazatlan and wrote her mother a Beautiful People letter ...

   And she found Zonk and, unexpectedly, the famous Ken Kesey and beautiful
   people. But one thing about the beautiful people themselves-Namely, the
   Merry Pranksters. She had heard

   of the fabulous Merry Pranksters even in San Jose. Kesey and Zonk talked
   about them all the time, of course. The fabulous Babbs, the fabulous
   Mountain Girl, the fabulous Cassady, Hermit, Hassler and the rest. She had
   a Prankster name, Black Maria, but she was not yet a Prankster. She was
   sensitive even to the contours of Kesey's world, too. Sooner or later
   Kesey would reunite with the Pranksters. ..

   Well. .. put out Zonker's shirt when the coast is clear. Zonker's billowy
   faggy-looking shirt. Let him stay out on his jungle run for a while. If he
   enjoys the Fugitive game, why spoil it.

   Shhhhhhhhhhwaaaaaaaaap

   flopping lush P.V. fronds Kesey thrashes out of the jungle and across the
   road-

   Cars? one Mex one American coming in pale tan VW? no, no cars, man, and
   then down across the road to rocky scrabble down by the ocean on the
   rocks, his heart rattling away, he sinks down in his Cornel Wilde running
   jacket listening

   whop!

   surf hits the rocks, just a little holiday in picturesque P.V. with the
   sea kicking up at twilight. He concentrates on the surf-analogy spoken
   here?-but the surf is too aimless this way. His heart rattles tachycardiac
   at this speed, and the surf is synched in to another thing WHOPping
   against the rocks

   Branngggh

   a tin-door sound up on the road like the ominous tin-car-door sounds in
   Hud always bring on the bad action-like brown Mex and crewcut drip-dry
   American up on the road eyes rocketing around, Brown Mex puffing
   I'm-supposed-to-be-off-duty-now-senor. Kesey faces out to sea, pulls a
   tablet out of the jacket. Makes the pink cover visible as if to prove just
   an aimless surf artist drawing water swells furl by furl like Leonardo who
   must have been a head, all the minute instincts, to sit by the water
   drawing the little furls as the water laps up on beach then starts rolling
   back toward the sea and minute little churning furls in the lead edge of
   the water, he drew it all, furl by furl, like a very meth head plugged
   into the great God Rotor. More surf, then

   Kaboom!

   first-they're FIRING on him. They don't give a shit.

   Hot pursuit!

   we got the guns and the rights, signed on this piece of paper here, one
   move blow yr fucking head off and you have already moved, Kesey-

   Hot pursuit!

   Kaboom!

   but nothing happens. Silence except for the surf.

   That is very paranoid, hondo why would they try to blast you out of the
   tub with elephant guns anyway. It must be workmen using dynamite. So he
   edges up to the road and it is workmen all right, sweating and heaving
   while the green fronds flap up the hill. He'll just sit here and

   watch them dynamite

   SURE

   just watch them dynamite while every gringo car comes spinning off the
   shore drive out here Baskin-Robbins tourist matron lookout and say "Hey,
   Honey, that's Ken Kee-zee..."

   Back into the jungle, Cornel Wilde. Heart still banging up to the edge of
   fibrillation, through the lush shadowy danks of the jungle. Well, yessir,
   lookee here a minute, what's this. A three-sided hut in the jungle, some
   kind of woodsman's hut, with a cot in it and a little hoard of mango
   papaya, some kind of pallid little fruit. He sinks back on the cot, unzips
   his fly to air out his sweating nuts and dips into his jacket and pulls
   out three roaches and wraps a leaf around them like a cone and lights up.
   He cuts open a fruit and it bleeds meek white and he puts it aside.

   A TRAP FOR JUNGLE RUNNERS

   this perfect little snug harbor to suck you in, a hut, a cot, meek milk
   white fruit to eat, a joint of sorts, oh to be back in Baskin-Robbins
   country just one time facing endless beige tubs of ice cream 31 flavor
   decisions to make, pointed cone or cup-style

   !paranoia!

   but this is the real-life jungle, Major. Two-winged flies, dapple-wing
   Anapholes, Culex tarsalis, verruga-crazed Phlebotomus biting 8-day fever
   and Oriental sores, greenhead rabbit-fever horseflies, tularemic Loa loa,
   tsetse mites, Mexican fleas, chinches, chiggers, velvet ants, crab lice
   crawling up your balls up your belly under your arms right up to your
   eyelashes for a nice fix of Mexican murine typhus, puss caterpillars,
   cantharidae beetles, Indian bedbugs, ticks, itch mites nice for scabies
   and rickety pox, Pacific Coast female tick hiding in the hairs at the base
   of the head sucking in the death bloat with blood, paralysis coming up
   from the toes will it reach the lungs before the big blood sausage mother
   drops off, a blood bag with tiny feet wriggling like worm hairs

   DDT!

   he gets down and pulls the DDT can out of the jacket and starts dusting
   all around the ground there around the cot, setting up a mighty defense
   perimeter against the mites of the jungle-which is very funny, come to
   think of it-down on all fours in deadly battle with the microscopic mites
   while

   THEY

   close in to slam you away for five, eight, twenty years... driven at last
   out onto the edge of your professed beliefs. You believed that a man
   should move off his sure center out onto the outer edges, that the outlaw,
   even more than the artist, is he who tests the limits of life and that-The
   Movie :::: by getting totally into Now and paying total Attention until it
   all flows together in the synch and imagining them all into the Movie,
   your will will determine the flow and control all jungles great and small

   Next to last joint in all of Mexico

   he pulls it out of his pocket and lights up. Maybe I'll knock off the
   grass for a while. Su-u-u-ure.

   And then believe all that crap you've been claiming about altering by
   accepting. Believe it! Or you are a goner, and boy, a walking dead man
   forevermore fading finally inaudible LIKE THE VOICES MUMBLING BITONES IN
   THE CATHEDRAL !

   And now that I've got your attention-if he sits very still, the rush
   lowers in his ears, he can concentrate, pay total attention, an even,
   even, even world, flowing into now, no past terrors, no anticipation of
   the future horror, only now, this movie, the vibrating parallel rods, and
   he can feel them drawn into the flow, his, every verruga fly, velvet ant,
   murine fleas and crabs, every chinch and tick, every lizard, cat, palm,
   the very power of the most ancient palm, held in his will, and he is
   immune-

                                    chapter

                                      XXII

                                    !Diablo!

   i

   MOUNTAIN GIRL STUCK IT OUT WITH BABBS, GRETCH, Walker-for the sake of the
   great idea-and she meant it-but any way she thought it out, it came out
   Kesey. Mountain Girl was almost eight months pregnant now. The bus, The
   Movie, was at a total standstill now, sinking into the swamper bogs. One
   day a package came in by mail, from Mexico, a tape, from Kesey, to
   Mountain Girl. And there was his voice. She could hardly make out a word
   he said, the quality of the tape was so bad-all she could make out was, he
   was in the jungle somewhere and paranoid as hell and smoking a lot of
   grass.

   O dear dead one!

   Then Babbs made the decision to take the bus to Mexico. They were a little
   paranoid themselves, about the heat put on the Acid Tests. Two days after
   the story broke about Kesey being in Puerto Vallarta, the good fink
   California press ran another big one: Kesey's pals in LSD party in L.A. -
   a barnburner about the Watts Test. But mainly they couldn't hack it any
   more; not even Babbs. Get the goddamn bus moving, that was the main thing.

   Mountain Girl had one more ordeal to go through. She had to stand trial in
   San Francisco for possession of marijuana, result of the bust on the
   rooftop. All the shit in society that the Pranksters had liberated
   themselves from through years of arduous initiation-the shit rolled in, in
   lava gulps. She had to sit there, great with child, like a prisoner of war
   in a bamboo' cage, while the straight world put her on prize exhibit and
   clucked and remonstrated and scolded and then shook its head and blubbered
   a little over her. Doped, seduced and abandoned, the poor miscreant
   teenager. She got a little Prankster mileage out of it even then, although
   she had to play it fairly straight, just to let them play out their game
   so she could get on with it. Their fantasy for her was a new dawn for this
   unfortunate girl, not a beeline for Mexico, but that was their fantasy.

   Mountain Girl showed up in court on March 20 in a red dress, four inches
   above the knees, and this was long before mini-dresses were on every
   eyeball, and pregnant as hell. She came to court on the arm of the
   Cavalier Hassler. Hassler was great throughout the whole thing. He was her
   sanity. Hassler came to court with her, wearing a green velveteen shirt,
   yellow boucle stretch pants and red boots, and when the reporters came up
   slavering for sob stuff, he put them on so righteously, it was beautiful.

   "We must do everything possible," he would say, peering out as sincere as
   the Student Council president from under his Prince Valiant locks, "to get
   Carolyn on her feet and out of this life of crime"-Carolyn Adams,
   naturally, being the fantasy that the Court knew her by. "I'm going to be
   the strong stabilizing force in her life"-vibrating yellow and green.
   "She's had a lot of misjudgment."

   "My misjudgment may extend to you," said Mountain Girl. Great fun had by
   all.

   The sob-story angle was the fantasy they all came up with for

   her in court, her lawyer included. It was like they had all looked at her
   and thought it over and hmmmmmmmm this poor misguided runaway girl 20
   years old, lately a teenager, you understand, and more than seven months
   in the family way seduction by the demon Kesey who left her to take the
   whole blame for the dope charge as well as abandoning her with an unborn
   child. Urgggggggggghhhhhh the prosecutor agreed on it, her lawyer agreed
   on it, the Judge agreed on it. So went the Justice game. And where was the
   demon Kesey who left so fast breathing dope from every nostril-it was as
   if everybody was going to be nice to her by way of pointing out the lesson
   of Kesey's evil.

   Her lawyer, Steven Dedina, said: "Carolyn is no dope fiend, no dope
   addict. Her one addiction is a perennial overdose of solicitude for
   persons who are far away. Were it not for that particular addiction, this
   defendant would not be standing in this particular place at this
   particular time."

   So on March 22 Mountain Girl was let off with a fine of $250 for
   possession of marijuana. Yet if Kesey had left her in a lurch, it was a
   lurch that they would never understand in a million years.

   THE TRIP DOWN INTO MEXICO WAS THE BUS AT ITS MOST Awful. Mountain Girl, so
   pregnant, just held on and forced back the bilious as the thing bounced
   and pitched and rolled through the desert. She felt like a 200-pound egg.
   But moving again! that was the main thing. Anything was better than what
   she had been going through. And this was truly something. Every 20 miles
   it seemed like the bus broke down and Babbs sweated over it. All the
   vibrations outside were bad. Corpses, chiefly. Scrub cactus, brown dung
   dust and bloated corpses, dogs, coyotes, armadillos, a cow, all
   gas-bellied and dead, swollen and dead, Babbs, Gretch, Faye and the kids,
   Walker and Mountain Girl.

   The fantasy this time had been dreamed up by Zonker. Zonker had gotten in
   touch with them, and Hagen had already driven down in an old car. Now the
   bus was going to keep a secret rendezvous with them in Mazatlan. Kesey had
   lit out for Mazatlan after the big scare in Puerto Vallarta.

   In Puerto Vallarta, Kesey had sure enough had something to worry about
   after all. Chief Arturo Martinez Garza of the Mexican Federales had
   ordered a search of Puerto Vallarta on February 16, two days after the
   story broke in the California papers. They had hassled all strange
   bohemian-looking Americans on the streets and so on. But Kesey had already
   made a run for it, back to Mazatlan. Zonker had arranged the rendezvous
   for the beach at Mazatlan, such-and-such a day, such-and-such an hour.

   Babbs flogged the bus through the corpse horizon day and night, desperate
   to make it on time, with the bus breaking down over and over again,
   everybody ill, not just Mountain Girl, but flogging on like it was life or
   death. And finally, Mazatlan, the sea, the big curve of the malecon-they
   made it. This was the flow, and it was a sickening horrible flow, but they
   had made it, and they tooled up to the rendezvous point-no Kesey. No
   Zonker and no Hagen.

   It was too much, this particular predictable fuckup, after all that. It
   wasn't a cool thing for them to just sit there by the beach in this lurid
   freak of a bus, such as Mexico had never seen, but this was too much, and
   they sat there, beat, and let the hours tool by. They were a hell of a hit
   with the Mexicans, however. They never saw anything like it. "!Diablo!"
   they kept saying. Women hid their children with their skirts. A whole
   bunch of locals gathered around the bus and grinned their hideous
   magenta-gummed native grins and stared at the crazies.

   Heeeee!-an old car with no windows in the mother comes by, slowing down.
   The face at the driver's window, with the incredulous look-Hagen. And that
   old gray head peeking over the window's edge in the back, just peeking
   over ever so gingerly-could it possibly be . .. Hagen stops and gets out.
   Then the back door opens ever so gingerly and out steps a gray-haired soul
   with his head cocked to one side, radiating surprise and appall and not at
   all happy about the Diablo multitudes.

   He has on a hincty washed-out faded tourist sport shirt and balloon-seat
   pants. He walks like a repertory theater shambles. He looks ten or fifteen
   years older, like an old workadaddy on the 21-day plan to Mexico. Ecce
   Fugitive.

   Shee-ut, it's all too freaking absurd, this secret rendezvous. The bus
   glowing Day-Glo on the beach at Mazatlan, the Diablo multitudes whooping
   it up like a cock fight, Mountain Girl beautiful and fulsome with her hair
   down to her waist and dyed yellow from the last Test-they could have sold
   tickets.

   You're looking at the New Super Fugitive, Mountain Girl: Steve
   Lamb-45-year-old gray-haired ninny. Certified I.D.; Zonker's driver's
   license with the Steve Lambrecht doctored to read Steve Lamb and the birth
   date altered to make him 45 instead of 25. Mild-mannered lamb among men,
   Steve Lamb, 45-year-old reporter, creep and amateur ornithologist,
   broadcaster for KSRO, Mighty 590 on your dial. Got his tape recorder right
   here, yessir, for collecting bird calls. Also you never know when the spot
   news will break and the diligent reporter is always ready, even on
   holiday. Old mild-mannered Steve Lamb has learned the secret of
   invisibility, which is to crawl into the rut, the bottomest awfulest part
   of the sunken way society has dug for all those who properly fear her
   might, O Mighty 590.

   But hardly seem worth it, somehow, with the bus beginning to glow in the
   Mexican dusk. !Fuck it! !Diablo! !Cosmo! Let's bull it through, here in
   the Rat lands! Glittering Prankster glances all around. Paint it big
   enough and bright enough and they won't even be able to see it! Kesey and
   Mountain Girl and Babbs and Gretch and Faye and the kids standing here in
   the Rat vistas... and along the edge of the circle a little
   Mexican-looking girl with long black hair just emerged from the old car
   ... Black Maria stares out to sea.

                                    chapter

                                     XXIII

                                  The Red Tide

   FOCKING RED TIDE, MAN, AND EVERYBODY IN MANZANILLO is up tight. Tropic of
   Cancer, heat 110 degrees, no wind, many mosquitoes, and the red tide
   killing the fish. Thousands, tens of thousands focking dead fish floating
   belly up in the red tide. The stench you would not believe, and there is
   something in the air spewed up from the ocean that makes your eyes smart.
   Some people they feel like they have it in the lungs, like the flu. There
   is no greater calamity than the red tide, because we live on the fishing
   here in Manzanillo. Unless it is the American crazies. On top of the red
   tide, appearing like they rose up out of the red tide itself, we have the
   American crazies. Focking plague themselves, riding about in a devilish
   criminal bus. They ride into the plaza, near the great jaracanda tree, in
   a devilish bus covered in crazed fluorescent cholera flowers, gaudier than
   the red blossoms of Manzanillo's great jaracanda tree

   Red tide! and old women and children say, "!Diablo!", and cross
   themselves, which the American crazies think is very funny. We do not,
   however.

   The biggest of them, with a great mocking grin and American lightbulb
   eyeballs and pants of many colors, comes into our marketplace with a blond
   woman whom he calls Gretch and a trail of blond children behind him,
   rolling his grinning head around until he sees that all the world is
   watching, and then he throws his great arms of an ape up into the air and
   turns his eyeballs up and shouts:

   "!Eat alley! !Eat alley! !Take me to eat alley!"

   "You mean the market, senor?"

   Then he grins and stares with an intensity at the poor mestizo as if he
   has just uttered the most penetrating remark in the history of all Mexico
   and says:

   "Yeah! Yeah! Right! Right! Right!"

   And all the world gives way, wondering, as this strange train goes
   escombering into the marketplace.

   There is much talk here about the crazies. Many think that these people
   are Germans, refugees from a cabala that failed. They mistake their
   strange talk for German. Some people think that they are American
   gangsters, in hiding. But I think that they came up out of the red tide.

   !Aguaje!

   In truth! Out in the ocean, where the water was once deepest blue-green,
   or, at worst, yellow-green near the beach, there are now vast streaks of
   reddish water, as if there were a channel cutting through the ocean
   itself, stretching for miles, hot and turbid, thick as mucus. The fish die
   almost at once when they enter it. I have watched a mullet come upon it.
   She swam from the blue-green water into the red tide and suddenly she is
   keeling over, as if paralyzed, then struggling to come upright again, then
   thrashing about crazily as if dizzy, then heading for the surface, where
   she whirls, flashing in the sunlight, then collapses, keeling over on her
   side again, paralyzed, then sinks, and then, by and by, without doubt,
   floats back up, dead, to join the great stinking school of dead fish, dead
   crabs, dead sea bass, mullets, thread herring, mackerel, shrimp, even
   barnacles, coquinas, sailfish, marlin, porpoises, turtles, huge gobs of
   reeking gluey tissue floating in a grisly death school on the red tide.
   Struck dead-

   -by what? By the plankton. All the world knows that the plankton cause the
   red tide-as if that could be called a cause. For the plankton are always
   there, millions of invisible animiculae, thousands to a cupful of
   seawater. It is they who reflect blue-green and give our ocean its color,
   although elsewhere they reflect red and make the Red Sea red, without harm
   to any animal, and the Vermillion Sea vermillion and the Lake of Blood a
   rose-red milk of sulphur. But here, off the placid Bay of Manzanillo in
   the Pacific Ocean, this little invisible ... um ... dinoflagellate,
   Gymnodinium brevis, just one cell to him and two whips, whipping and
   darting about, begins to multiply. And suddenly he appears to explode,
   should one look at him under a microscope, as Charles Darwin once did, and
   he divides into two dinoflagellates, and they divide into four, and so on,
   in a progression of utmost rapidity until there are in truth ten million
   of them in a cup of water, and the water turns red from their red pigment,
   which reflects light, until finally, from the focking millions of
   explosions, a poison as powerful as aconitine gives off into the water-but
   why?-why has it started now, this malignant explosion of the plankton
   into-

   -one vast immortal Group Animicula, fifteen miles long and three miles
   wide, immortal, in truth. The first little Gymnodinium brevis still lives
   just as surely as the 128-billionth as the red tide spreads. For they
   increase simply by cell division. The great marlins die, the porpoises,
   all the creatures of the sea die, and the fishermen die, but the
   Gymnodinium is immortal, the instant brother of every Gymnodinium brevis
   who ever lived, no past, no future, only Now, and immortal, the little
   fockers. No cause, senor, no starting point in time, just the point at
   which your game intersected the 256-octillionth Gymnodinium and all his
   ancestors and successors in old Manzanillo and brought you up tight. We
   know only that yesterday there were fish, and today the fish are dead and
   the poison plankton and the American crazies are alive, and tomorrow we
   must find out the cause and the cure-or could it possibly be that
   yesterday and tomorrow are merely more of Now stretching fifteen miles and
   three miles wide immortal-

   THEN, NOW, ESAU, JUDITH, BASHEMATH, REUEL, SUSPENDED in the mucus; what a
   bummer. Mountain Girl lies on the bed in her room; staring at the ceiling;
   a pisspoor job of plastering it is, too; and all of them suspended in
   110-degree mucus. She; Kesey; Faye; their children; George Walker; the new
   chick, Black Maria; have a house by the beach; new; raw certified Rat
   construction; cinderblock and plaster; she could scrabble through it with
   her hands. Fifty yards away, across the beach road, The Rat Shack; this
   being a Purina Chow factory; yep; inhabited by Babbs, Gretchen Fetchin and
   Babbs's children; a curious little building empty of Purina Chow and
   glistening with tiles inside. All of them gittin stuck and stranded like
   flies in this 110-degree mucus of Manzanillo with the red tide stinking
   the place up for good measure; Hagen, with his leg in a cast; Julius
   Karpin, the Hardest Head in the West, from Berkeley, of the Prankster
   outer circle, here with his leg in a cast. They picked out Manzanillo for
   these very reasons, however; isolated, few Americans in the summer, off
   the tourist trail; secure desert island. Stranded in an uptight town; no
   roads leading north and no roads leading south; nine or ten hours of hell
   by bus to Guadalajara the only way to git back to the rest of the world;
   can't git out in the daytime and do anything because of the heat; can't
   git out at night because of the mosquitoes; the jungle beyond the Rat
   Shack filthy with cocoa palms and all sortsa jungle shit; itching crawling
   alive like a chigger-ridden groin; all manner exotic vermin; sting inflame
   chigger-blister mosquito heaven, with scorpions for good measure coming up
   outta the dung dust like lobsters as the crab louse is to the crab.
   Standing dead still in this shit; jes waiting; for what; for bread,
   mainly; every day in supplication at the altar of the Telegrafo, for money
   from Stateside; Kesey's lawyers supposed to be hassling up money; and
   everyday some soul, like the chick Kesey picked up, Black Maria, down to
   the Telegrafo using an alias waiting for telegrafo coming from some lawyer
   in San Francisco; or from the Mexico City lawyer Kesey's stateside lawyers
   had gotten hold of to straighten things out with the Mexican police; he
   was called Estrella; for Star Lawyer? who the fuck knows; here on Devil's
   Island, us fugitives; no sense of time at all; unbelievable bad news is
   all that filters from the U.S.; Ron Boise, who had a rheumatic heart, has
   died of a heart attack at the age of thirty-two; Norman Hartweg in an
   accident on the drive east with Marge the Barge and Evan Engber, and he is
   in a hospital in Ann Arbor, almost completely paralyzed; unbelievable
   things out of the time-death Karma; and here no time; jes a dead still now
   stretching back eternally and forward eternally.

   So Mountain Girl lies on the bed and stares up through the heat waves
   rising in the 110-degree mucus of Manzanillo; and she is not high on
   anything; maybe slightly out of her head, but not high; no, not even out
   of her head; but it's like that acid time-warp thing; like they're all
   thrust back permanently into a primitive time; this is permanent; Kesey
   can't go back ever; they will slam him away for good; meaning she can't go
   back ever, either; how? back to the bamboo cage to be clucked and lectured
   and blubbered over until she drowned?; none of them can go back; 'cause
   there is nothing to go back to; it is all here now; Mexico, even as Kesey
   foresaw that day in La Honda and she started learning Spanish; which none
   of them really know, however, except Black Maria; always in a cocoon shut
   off from the worthy up-tight nativos; only the Pranksters are the
   primitives; thrown back on their own resources; reliving the primitive
   life of man with only the dwindling hope of a bountiful miracle from the
   sacred Telegrafo to possibly break the spell... of 3,000 years ago.

   Three thousand years ago Mountain Girl walks down to the water, the
   backwater, every day to wash clothes, diapers and sundry other shit; every
   day walking through the heat waves under the salty sun through the scrub
   grass and dung sand, to wash clothes, by the waters of the ... Nile and
   the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash herself at the river; and her
   maidens walked along by the river's side; and when she saw the ark among
   the flags, she sent her maid to fetch it... it is as if she is walking
   down to the river and she is watching herself, a maiden, 3,000 years ago,
   walking down to the river, at the same time, in ... the Middle East; it is
   always the Middle East somehow, out of an old illustrated Bible; 110
   degrees, bulrushes and the eternal laundry bummer; nothing to read here
   but The Nova Express by William Burroughs; the Nietzsche and Dostoevsky
   that Kesey has; and in the Bible; everybody goes through Nova Express in a
   couple of hours; but the Bible they can linger over ... and gradually
   without anybody hardly saying anything about it, without getting high
   even, they are in another time dimension; biblical tribe, biblical
   tribeswoman washing in the water; living like the children of Isaac and
   Rebecca in the First Book; even taking biblical identities; they each
   choose, become a character in the Bible; in truth; it is 3,000 years ago,
   now stretching back infinitely to ... the very Genesis; to Esau; Kesey is
   Esau; the hairy one; and Esau was a cunning hunter; a man of the field;
   and Jacob was a plain man, dwelling in tents; 13. Did they grow up alike?
   Describe them.-Esau was a skillful hunter, and Jacob was a quiet man, fond
   of home; 14. Which was the first born?-Esau; 15. Did he value his
   birthright? The proof?-He sold it, when hungry, and faint, to Jacob for a
   dish of potted beans or other food. So thousands, for present pleasure,
   will risk or lose their souls; 16. To whom did he sell it, and for
   what?-See No. 15; 23. Whom did Esau choose as his wives?-Judith and
   Bashemath, Hittites. Gen. 26:34.; 24. Did his parents approve his
   choice?-No; they were grieved by it; and Bashemath bore Reuel... 3,000
   years ago; for there is no time in this place; only an eternal now
   stretching on infinitely over the entire world and all the history
   thereof; for the world seeketh its own level; which is the sea; and all
   living creatures of the sea shall die; but the Gymnodinium brevis, which
   knoweth no time, except now, shall live forever; ye have heard that it was
   said by them of old time, The earth is round; but I say unto you . . .

   KESEY WOULD LIE OUTSIDE THE CASA GRANDE IN A HAMMOCK. Black Maria, in
   tight black slacks, would keep brooding, staring out to sea with her back
   to them, which annoyed everyone. They would occasionally snigger slightly,
   which made her more up tight, of course. Julius and Mike Hagen both had
   their casts painted most lurid and glorious Day-Glo in bus designs. Kesey
   lay in the hammock reading Nietzsche :::: who would have thought the old
   whiskered Valkyrie was such a head, into the pudding...

   And little cycles within cycles. Hagen kept repeating traumatic injuries.
   In Barcelona he had a motorcycle accident and kept riding and ended up
   with a permanently injured shoulder. In Canada the same thing all over
   again. And now in Mexico with his broken leg in a Day-Glo cast he felt
   something... grisly . . . under there, and spied a tick, and cut open the
   cast and found two more and pus oozing under the cast. He closed the whole
   thing up by wrapping adhesive around the cast.

   "Why'd you put that tape over your pretty cast, Mike?"

   "Looking for ticks."

   Couple of days later he couldn't even walk as far as the Rat Shack.
   Nothing to do but deliver himself up to the Rat ministry of the Hospital
   Civil.

   "Give me some speed, Julius, so I can deal with the bastards."

   Kesey tries to cheer him up by telling him he can film the forthcoming
   wedding between Mountain Girl and George Walker.

   "Hey!" says Hagen. "Maybe we can get the guy, the mayor jefe, to do the
   ceremony out here."

   Hagen begins to jack-leg around on the cast, snapping his fingers. The
   dexedrine is beginning to stir and tickle at the boy inside the cast.

   "Fuck that," says Mountain Girl.

   "And a lot of flowers!"

   "Fuck that."

   Mountain Girl looks like a great gorgeous Amazon-and very
   down-in-the-mouth, with her lurid Acid Test yellow hair hanging down to
   her waist but a little circle of black on top, like a cap where it is
   coming in natural at the roots. Like Mike, she'll put off the mundane
   bullshit she loathes just so long as possible. We've known for three weeks
   that she'd love to be legally married, for her child to have legal Mexican
   rights and she's known for nine months when that marriage deadline would
   have to be met.

   George, Faye and Zonk come back from the market with food, George wearing
   Zonker's blue velour pants, a shirt with broad orange and white vertical
   stripes, by Gretchen Fetchin, and knee-high boots he has painted in
   diagonal orange and white stripes, and his hair with orange tips from the
   Acid Test lurid bleach. All is arranged at city hall for the marriage,
   Miss Carolyn Adams and Mr. George Walker, and at the Hospital Civil for
   the baby.

   "-and we'll buy a cot of white-"

   "Fuck that."

   "-and we'll film it on the beach at sunset with microphones. Babbs can run
   a cable out and a speaker-and music-we can have Gretch on the organ with
   The Wedding March?'

   "Fuck that," says Mountain Girl.

   SO MOUNTAIN GIRL AND GEORGE WERE MARRIED, QUIETLY, IN town. And Mountain
   Girl had the baby in the Hospital Civil, a healthy blond girl, whom she
   named Sunshine. At sea level...

   Kesey in la casa grande-there's always a taffy triangle being pulled at
   the house, what with four private rooms laced with endless variations on
   the Faye-me-George-Mountain Girl theme.

   Mountain Girl is grimming on: "Look at this wall. It's awful. No, I'm
   serious, look at it. I could scrabble through this wall in five minutes."

   "Whyn't you go roll us a joint?"

   "Can we smoke it in my room so I don't have to keep jumping every time
   Faye bangs the door?"

   "Hmmmm ..."

   "Never mind. That's a tricky question. Besides it keeps me on my toes in
   here."

   SPIRITS PICKING UP SLIGHTLY IN THE RED TIDE TORPOR. Pranksters beginning
   to do small Prankster things. Hagen back from the Hospital Civil hobbling
   but hassling with the old sweet Vesper boy charm. No stereo rigs,
   projectors, video tapes to be hassled hereabouts on Devil's Island, but he
   finds the biggest rig there is and hassles some poor local out of it-a
   turtle. A huge sea turtle, weighs about 50 pounds. Much jubilation over
   the monster, but nobody knows what to do with it, not even Faye, the
   pioneer wife and master cook, dietician, technician and mechanic. No
   caldron they are ever likely to get can deal with it. So they put a huge
   skull and crossbones in Day-Glo on its shell and put it back in the sea,
   thinking happily of another 200 years of life they have assured it. Nobody
   in Zecotopetl death-god Mexico will seek this one for his stewpot...

   Babbs, after many days of glumming in his Purina Chow redoubt, strolls
   over, lewding out, "Hi, Je-e-e-ed!" to Kesey's three-year-old son. Only
   Babbs in his Be-elzebabbs best could greet a three-year-old with such lewd
   lubricious loonacy.

   Page Browning has pulled in, ready to go, enchanted with Huaraches and the
   Rat thing. Huaraches on every foot in Mexico! Zea-lot himself could not
   have devised a more devilish troublesome contrivance.

   "They keep 'em strung out on huaraches! You can't run in 'em, you can't
   walk in 'em, they never fit, they hurt your feet. All you can do is sit
   tight. That's how they keep this country straight. They keep 'em strung
   out on this bummer!" and so on.

   Suddenly-Sandy Lehmann-Haupt turns up, back from way over the edge, on a
   motorcycle. He drove all the way from New York City on this motorcycle,
   halfway across the U.S.A. and all the way through the Rat lands to this
   southwesternmost edge of Mexico, no mean stint even for a Neal Cassady.
   Kesey looks at him and can't believe it. He looks stronger, healthier,
   calmer, more confident than he has ever seen him. It gives him a
   foreboding that he can't put a name on ...

   Even Bob Stone sails in, Bob Stone from way back from old Perry Lane days.
   He pulls in in a Hertz car. He flew into Mexico City, got a Hertz car. He
   has an assignment from Esquire to do a story on Kesey in Exile. Ah; so the
   old world still waits. Stone, still hypersensitive, seeing the FBI and
   Federales behind every cocoa palm-or else scorpions-and in that very
   moment, however, plunging head first, as always, into whatever chaos
   debacle any Prankster cares to dream up, crying lissen this is dangerous
   as he swandives off every handy cliff.

   Hooking down dexedrine. Stone and Babbs go off in Stone's car, high on
   pills, heading up Tepic way, in Rat country. Come back giggling and
   carrying on over weird experience with the Road Animal. They had driven
   through the dung dust, days without sleep and soaring on dex, scrub
   country and burros, and night fell and it got really weird. Stone sees
   little Mex bridges and they become gila monsters, and Babbs sees them,
   too. The road becomes the veriest little tightrope between the no-man's
   land of the monsters, and then all at once the monsters take command of
   the road!-up ahead, the biggest road monster any man has ever seen, so
   huge it straddles the road, like a tarantula with legs 10 feet high, on
   the edges of the road, and its huge filthy body and jaws over the middle
   waiting for food and their car is bearing down toward it, don't dare stop
   and don't dare go on-

   "No! Don't go near it!" shouts Stone.

   "No," says Babbs, "we've got to. We've got to go through it."

   "Through it!!"

   "We've got to," says Babbs. "If we don't, we'll never make any

   progress. "

   Suddenly it seems the most crucial thing in the history of the world that
   they make progress. "I know! But it's too-"

   "Got to go through it!" says Babbs. They steel for the debacle,
   Armageddon, the end of all- -and sail through it!-

   --it's a focking great road-building machine of some sort, tooling down
   the highway at Mex huarache speed, the mestizos up top look down
   bewildered at this car that just shot under them at 60 or 70 ...

   Stone and Kesey tooling up toward Sonora, nice and high on speed. Stone
   thinks he's behind tinted glass in a cab, although he is doing the
   driving. So like a taxi! They pick up a kid, an American, hitchhiking back
   to California. They can take him as far as Sonora. We're going to
   California, says Stone, and they gun off. "Californee!" says Kesey, in the
   stupidest country way possible. "Yeah," says Stone. "I'm driving this
   fella here"-Kesey-"up to California to see the sun come up. He's never
   seen the sun come up."

   "Awww," says Kesey, "yer pullin my leg. Ain't no sun come up.

   "I wouldn't put you on," says Stone. "The sun comes up and you're going to
   see it." Passing strange somehow to be riding in a taxi cab through the
   Mexican nowhere with Kesey, behind a tinted glass.

   "Awwwww," says Kesey. The kid, meanwhile, is deathly quiet.

   "I'm not lying!" says Stone. "Look up there. There it is, the sum

   "Uhhh, uhhhh, God, you was right, there it is, the sun! Why ... it
   fi-i-i-i-lls the sky! It li-i-i-i-i-ights up the valley! It shi-i-i-i-ines
   upon the ocean!"

   After a few miles the kid speaks up in a casual way, best he can, "Say,
   fellows, I think I'll get out in Tepic instead of Sonora. 1 just
   remembered, I got to see somebody there."

   So he gets out.

   Never trust a Prankster!

   And Cassady-Cassady barreling onto the Rat strand in yet another Cassady
   vehicle, revved up revved up revved up at the ; eternal Cassady speed,
   with a new typical Cassady Excalibur. He has a four-pound sledge hammer
   with the handle wrapped in Day-Glo tape, which he throws about from noon
   to doom like an Indian club, flipping it up in the air and catching it,
   flipping it up in double spins, triples, quadruples, true spins, eccentric
   spins, sprocketing his shoulders his elbows his knees his feet about in
   the jerky beat. The Prank and the Schism are apparently long forgotten. If
   there's any soul can break up this focking red tide and clear the mucus
   air sailing speedily on all channels, it is Cassady. So they smoke some
   grass and climb up on top of la casa grande and sit up there while Cassady
   circuses and sprockets with his sledge hammer off on his speedy trip just
   the barest l/30th second from Now at dusk. Cassady does his wild American
   sledge hammer ballet by the side of a pool of backwater and they can see
   Cassady's reflection in the pool and their own reflection looking down at
   Cassady, but looking up in the pool in perfect asymmetric playback,
   winking Day-Glo and dusk, invoking apparitions from the past, a moon door,
   for the world in the immense act of contemplating itself, Domnu, sativa
   and rajas all at once, fons et origo, instant Movie-Now

   Wet-handle Harry!

   And the Halusion Gulp begins to shake its wings again like leather paddle
   flaps on the wheel o' fortune carnival game, a Rat bird, but it knows the
   one hole in the sky. Kesey in la casa grande with the wind up and the sky
   cloudy, and the Gulp flapping, and the Rat plaster paneled with pages from
   out of Marvel comics, whole scenes of Dr. Strange, Sub Mariner, the
   Incredible Hulk, the Fantastic Four, the Human Torch-Superheroes, in
   short. All heads believe them to be drawn by meth freaks, because of the
   minute phosphorescent dedication of their hands. Super-heroes!
   U:bermenschen! It was passing strange that Nietzsche, that curious little
   Peter Lorre misanthrope with whiskers and a sour black Tubingen
   professorial frock coat on, should be into the essence of the thing-

   -and Kesey can hear Bob Stone telling him, "Nietzsche is up in Heaven now,
   Ken, saying 'I dig what you're doing-but don't read my books' "-

   -yet the old Valkyrie was into the thing. The world not a line of cause
   and effect heading forward forever, but finite and ever-repeating, so that
   all that ever was and ever will be is caught up in now, in endless
   Recurrence, only waiting for the Superheroes to resurface; after which, a
   total revaluation. And combining Nietzsche's inspiration with his own of
   at-present-best-of man forever watching his own movie and never being able
   to get to the paradise beyond the screen: as Nietzsche glimmered, life is
   a circle and so it is the going, not the getting there, that counts. Live
   in the moment. Lots of good heads said it. I tried. I devoted much time
   and much energy. To find that those good heads had been tricked-that
   simple trick\ of I was right about living in the moment but we can never
   get in the moment! Orggggggg!

   Yet, as Pranksters and many close and near believe, he knows he has
   somehow caught sight of the great flapping beast and is somewhere beyond
   this side of the screen and into the true old full bare essence of the
   thing-he is onto what is popularly thought of as enlightenment... thinking
   back:

   Nighttime and he had gone out to the water, high on grass, and sat down
   and the light from the electric signs-Coca-Cola?-in the town came across
   the bay, and every line of light came off straight, the primitive line,
   Stone Age, the line of grass

   Cut to

   nighttime, same spot, high on acid, and the lines come off not straight
   but in perfect half circles, the acid line, the line of the

   present, the perfect circle, like the spiders they injected with acid, and
   they wove perfect little round webs

   Cut to

   nighttime, same spot, high on opium, only time he ever took hard dope, and
   the lines came off starting into circles and instead finished with a
   little hook, like the little hook in the water of a Japanese print, like
   the little hook even in the lines of that strange comic strip, The Spirit,
   and this was the line of the future, completing the circle without having
   to go all the way every time, getting there by knowing the beginning of
   the trip

   Cut to

   Nighttime and an electrical storm in the Mexican heat flashes, high on
   acid, the lightning breaking out-there!-there!-and the electricity flows
   through him and out of him, a second skin, a suit of electricity, and if
   the time was ever now it is-Now!-and he hurls his hand toward the sky to
   make the lightning break out where he points-Now!-we've got to close it,
   the gap between the flash and the eye, and make it, the reentry into Now
   ... as Superheroes ... open ... until he falls to the beach and Mountain
   Girl finds him holding his throat and choking as if he is gagging on sand
   ...

   Beyond acid. They have made the trip now, closed the circle, all of them,
   and they either emerge as Superheroes, closing the door behind them and
   soaring through the hole in the sapling sky, or just lollygag in the
   loop-the-loop of the lag. Almost clear! Presque vu!-many good heads have
   seen it-Paul telling the early Christians: hooking down wine for the Holy
   Spirit-sooner or later the Blood has got to flood into you for
   good-Zoroaster telling his followers: you can't keep taking haoma water to
   see the names of Vohu Mano-you've got to become the flames, man-And Dr.
   Strange and Sub Mariner and the Incredible Hulk and the Fantastic Four and
   the Human Torch prank about on the Rat walls of la casa grande like
   stroboscopic sledgehammer Cassadys, fons et origo ::::: and it is either
   make this thing permanent inside of you or forever just climb draggled up
   into the conning tower every time for one short glimpse of the horizon
   :::::

                                    chapter

                                      XXIV

                                The Mexican Bust

   HAGEN, MEANWHILE, WAS MORE AND MORE . . . HAGEN. The irresistible charmer
   ... and it seems some beautiful deb from California had insisted on
   following him to Mexico. Dear Dad. Don't worry about me. I am in Mexico
   with some beautiful people.. . Her father sensed beatnik and dope right
   away, of course, and pulled all manner of strings to find out where she
   was and get her back. At least the Pranksters figured later that was what
   explained the mysterious debacle that came next, on the road to
   Guadalajara.

   Hagen, Kesey and Ram Rod were driving up toward Guadalajara in a panel
   truck one night when they came upon a roadblock manned by Mexican
   Federales. What to do? Turn around? bust through? fake it? At the time,
   everything had been so cool with the local legals, they were feeling
   strong and confident, and so Kesey decided to stop and just do the old
   thing of draw them into the movie. God knows the Pranksters had coped with
   many cops before.

   But-of course, they couldn't speak Mexican, so they couldn't even get the
   Movie going with these Federales. The Federales grabbed all three of them
   and searched the truck immediately for grass, which they found, and that
   wrapped that up. Out in the rain and the dark in the Rat lands. The
   Mexicans don't hassle people over grass as much as the American cops, but
   they have the same kind of laws, and they are not delighted to have
   American heads guests of their country, and Kesey was "hot," as they say.
   A certified debacle, in a word.

   This Route 15 ran along the railroad tracks that come up from the
   Guatemalan border. Between the road and the tracks were the spiky dark
   clumps of a lot of high foliage, scrub and shit, thorns, razor leaves.
   Kesey smiles sadly and goes through a big well-you-got us, fellas,
   fair-and-square pantomine, that's the way it goes. The Federales take his
   turista card, which is a fake. Yup-you-win-fellas, and say, Lemme just go
   over in them bushes a second before you haul us off. Fella has to take a
   leak; all men equal, gringos and Mex and whatever, when the piss call
   comes, right-fellas? So the Federales say O.K. and Kesey goes off in the
   scrub-

   -out the corner of his eye he sees a train easing over the siding on the
   tracks, coming around the bend slow-

   -Haul ass! Rotor Rooter! Kesey plunges into the brush toward the tracks,
   thorns and razor leaves raking his legs, the light from the train shaking
   that weird sick ochre cast over the spiky brush clumps, thrashing through
   this shit, up against the side of the train jumps up on top of a coupling,
   grabs a ladder to the top of the boxcar. Rain comes in a sudden sheet,
   lightning breaks out, lighting up the whole scene and his body-Federales
   huffing and galomping through the scrub like comic-movie Mexicans popping
   buttons off their guts and screaming !hoy! !pronto! and then

   Hrhaaaaaaaaaammmnnnnnnnnnn

   The bastards are shooting at him! Mama don't 'low no grass-smokin' in
   hyar! Testy out here on edges of professed belief-

   blackness-then Cosmo let him in on it for an instant with a flash of
   lightning-more huffing harroomping

   Hrhaaaaaaaammmnnnnnnnnnn

   comic latino cops-until the train picks up speed and he lies battened down
   to the top of the car heading off to somebody's Edge City somewhere.

   Which turns out to be Guadalajara. He has no money on him, no grass, no
   nothing. He heads for the inevitable mariachi square, hunkers down in the
   dark, wet and shivering. Wonder do they tolerate gringo bums in this town?
   Daylight a Mexican comes through the park and strikes up a conversation,
   speaks English. He is a slender guy in his twenties, very handsome like a
   Valentino, almost feminine

   !Queer!

   offers to let Kesey rest up in his hotel room

   !Queer!

   so beat and shivering he takes him on it. The hotel is one step above a
   flophouse, but clean. He has a neat little room, this Mario, a snug
   harbor. "Go ahead, get some sleep." Kesey tries to fight off the sleep
   fantasy

   !Queer assault!

   but he falls asleep anyway, wakes up a long time later, all intact. Mario
   is broke himself, but gets off a collect telegram to Manzanillo under
   Kesey's new alias, Sol Almande. Salamander, you understand-the beast that
   lives in fire. Wait around all day and the next, Mario being nothing but a
   totally sweet person.

   What's his game?

   Down to the holy telegrafo to pray. All the huarache telegrafo workers
   sitting around under fluttering leaves of telegrams piling up. Hay tiempo.
   You have to know how to approach them, says Mario. Goes upstairs in the
   telegrafo. Presently the Huarache Chief rummages through the whole heap
   for a message for the burning Almande. But-nothing.

   Next morning Kesey decides to risk it, goes down to the American consulate
   as a poor broke grizzled balding American fisherman stranded and got to
   get back to Manzanillo. A girl there, a Miss Hitchcock, gives him 27 pesos
   for third-class bus fare to Manzanillo, and he gets on, with Mario waving
   a sweet valedictory goodbye. That was your bummer, Kesey, not to
   understand that the pure humble Mexican strain of sweetness-that was all
   that Mario was about, just a muy simpatico human being. The bus ride was
   horrible, eighteen hours of bouncing through the Rat lands, half road and
   half no road, the Rat lands and yet so many open faces. They look at you
   just like a head, totally open, wanting to find something rather than hide
   something. Many piss stops, and Kesey can only struggle around grizzled,
   waiting for the driver to get on with it. Kesey is hungry and burnt out
   like a husk. About ten hours out, they're stopped and the driver walks
   back and stares at Kesey with the wide-open simpatico look and gives him
   six pesos, just like that, without a word, worth about 17 cents but good
   for a taco or suchlike, and walks on back to the front of the bus. A
   strange land, this Rat land! Sometimes they know. There is hope!-not just
   for the Superaware elected few, but for the unsuspected multitudes who
   open up and look. They are waiting, here in this Rat land.

   Back in Manzanillo, and the adrenaline was flowing again. Hagen and Ram
   Rod were salted away in jail. Like everything in Mexico, the jail scene
   was tough and soft at the same time. It was filthy, crawling with ticks,
   lice, scorpions, the whole scene. The food was filthy, too. But you could
   have anything you wanted to put down your gullet sent in, if you could pay
   for it, from luscious enchilada meals to grass, speed and acid. Hagen and
   Ram Rod stayed delightfully high and miserable.

   In any case, Kesey began to feel like it was only a matter of time before
   they closed in. It wasn't so much the Mexicans he was worried about. The
   Mexicans were always ready to make a deal. It was the Stateside zealots.
   The FBI bodysnatchers worried him. He knew about Morton Sobell, the atom
   spy, who suddenly turned up one day at a border town in the custody of an
   FBI agent, walking across the border with the Feds. If the FBI can grab
   you in Mexico, physically, the Mexicans will play along with that, too.
   And the zealous head-buff San Mateo County cops. Word was that San Mateo
   cops were taking their vacations in Mexico for no other reason than to go
   Kesey-hunting and make more fat headlines. La casa grande and the Rat
   Shack becoming steadily more uncool as first one head and then another
   showed up, with big comradely grins on, kids from California, even from
   New York, who had somehow learned where Kesey is. They always came on like
   naturally the Pranksters would be shining with joy to see them-we holy
   few, we initiates of the acid scene-with the grins spilling out over the
   edge of their lower teeth. Obviously it was a big thing on the acid scene
   in the States to know where Kesey is. That was being very inside the
   thing. Yeah-I saw Kesey down there. Then-various Pranksters brought
   friends over. Including girls, of course. And Page struck up with a tall
   blond girl, kind of a Danish maiden sort, whom they all called Doris
   Delay. It was getting like La Honda, the tropical annex, La Honda in the
   Tropic of Cancer. People were bunked in and straggled all over the place,
   in the house, in the Rat Shack, on the bus. A girl named Jeannie got bit
   by a scorpion one night. Everybody woke up and what to do. They pondered
   awhile and decided to go with the flow and they all went back to sleep.
   She survived.

   Kesey remained very permissive about the whole thing. Nobody got shunted
   off. Put my professed beliefs to the Test. In any case, it was no longer
   possible to believe there was any semblance of secrecy about the whole
   Fugitive movie now. It was just a matter of time or
   lackadaisicalityityityityityityity . . . The whole scene would get Kesey
   up tight and he would get in a car and drive up on a bluff overlooking the
   ocean and smoke grass and watch the ocean ... like Black Maria, come to
   think of it.

   Black Maria was going through a private hell. Namely, she was lonely as
   hell. Lonely? One means, how could a truly out-front person feel lonely
   amid so many truly out-front people doing so many things together and
   getting high together all the time. Would Mountain Girl ever feel lonely?
   Would Mountain Girl ever feel desperate? It was unthinkable; Mountain Girl
   was synched into this whole thing. She, Black Maria, was probably the only
   person in the history of this whole thing to get lonely ... in the
   Prankster hierarchy.

   Prankster hierarchy? There wasn't supposed to be any Prankster hierarchy.
   Even Kesey was supposed to be the non-navigator and non-teacher. Certainly
   everybody else was an equal in the brotherhood, for there was no
   competition, there were no games. They had left all that behind in the
   straight world .. . but. .. call it a game or what you will. Right now,
   among the women, Mountain Girl was first, closest to Kesey, and Faye was
   second, or was it really vice versa, and Black Maria was maybe third, but
   actually so remote it didn't matter. Among the men, there was Babbs,
   always the favorite ... and no games... but sometimes it seemed like the
   old personality game ... looks, and all the old aggressive, outgoing
   charm, even athletic ability-it won out here, like everywhere else .. .

   Yet by and by Black Maria was a Prankster. It was just there, in the air,
   the fact that she was now a Prankster. She had altered the flow, and not
   by accepting it, either.

   Page's girl, Doris Delay, was going through the same thing. There was
   something she wanted to ask somebody, but how could she ask it. Finally
   she came up to Sandy Lehmann-Haupt and said, 'What do they mean-Never
   trust a Prankster?"

                                    chapter

                                      XXV

                            Secret Agent Number One

   AFTERNOON - PAGE COMES BUSTING IN LA CASA GRANDE saying, "Hey! There's a
   guy across the road taking pictures of us!"

   Sure enough. There is a guy peeking over the edge of a window in an
   unfinished cottage across the beach road, another cinderblock Rat wonder.
   The sun highlights off his camera lens. Kesey gets the adrenaline pumping
   for a run, but Page charges across the road to the cottage like he owns
   the place, followed shortly by Babbs.

   Inside the cottage he finds a Mexican, dressed like a businessman,
   metallic suit, white shirt and tie, looks like he's in his thirties.

   "What the hell do you think you're doing?" says Page.

   "Hello, amigo!" the guy says, looking fairly cool. He speaks English. "I
   theenk maybe I buy thees house. You like the beach here?"

   "Yeah! Yeah! Right! Right! Right!" says Babbs. Babbs has his friendly
   put-on grin turned up to such maximum intensity the guy flinches his cool
   momentarily, but he gets it back. ' "Yes?"

   "Yeah! Yeah! Right! Right! Right!"

   "Yes. I am glad. I like another person's opeenion in thees theengs.
   Well-so long, amigos!"-and he steps outside like he's going.

   "Send us some pictures if they turn out good," says Babbs.

   "Some pictures?"

   "Yeah! Yeah! Right! Right! Right!"

   "What pictures?"

   "Of us. We like pictures. We have a whole scrapbook. We like candid
   pictures, you know? I bet you took some good ones."

   "Yes." The Mexican looks very thoughtful. "I tell you, fren, maybe you can
   help me."

   "Yeah! Yeah! Right! Right! Right!"

   "I am weeth the Mexican Naval Intelligence, and maybe you can help ... us.
   We have reports of Russian submarines operating in these waters."

   "Sub-ma-rines!" says Babbs in total put-on wonderment.

   Several Pranksters have gathered in front of la casa grande to watch Babbs
   and Page and the Mexican outside the Rat cottage.

   "Yes," says the Mexican. "We have reports that thees submarines are coming
   een to shore at night, in thees waters. Have you notice eeny such
   acteevity?"

   "No-tice!" says Babbs. "Well I reckon by Christ we have! You oughta come
   out here some night! Some nights there's so goddamn many of them, you
   can't go to sleep for the signal lights. Shine right in the windows,
   blinking something fierce, and it's a tough code. A tough code. But we'll
   break it yet. We got a lotta good heads working on it. Why, this fella
   right here"-pointing to Page, and rattling on about the incredible brazen
   activity of the Russian submarines in these waters-while Cassady comes
   across the road, flipping his sledge hammer, singles, doubles, triples,
   way up in the air looping it, catching it behind his back,

   and so on, but not looking at them for a second. Cassady sets a brick up
   on a fence about fifteen feet from the Mexican, but doesn't say a word or
   even look, ratcheting his arms and legs this way and that to his private
   Joe Cuba. Then he heads back across the road.

   "Yes," says the Mexican. "Please may I ask you thees. We have a report on
   one of thees Russian who maybe was landing here from a submarine. He ees
   about five feet eleven, he ees a ... muscular man ... he looks about
   thirty years old ... he has ... blond hair, hees hair ees curly and he ees
   a leetle bald on the top... Have you seen eeny such person?"

   "One of these Russians!" says Babbs. "Have you been to Eat Alley?"

   "Eat Alley?"

   "Yeah! Yeah! Right! Right! Right! The marketplace ace. All you hear in the
   marketplace is Russian. They're all over the place. This thing is wide
   open already, man ! "

   The guy cocks his head and stares at Babbs through his shades as if maybe
   this will bring him into focus-

   -just then-

   Feeoofeeoofeeoofeeoofeeoofeeoofeeoofeeoo

   !Whop!

   -Cassady-twenty feet away across the beach road has suddenly wheeled and
   fired the four-pound sledge hammer end-over-end like a bolo and smashed
   the brick on top of the fence into obliteration, fifteen feet from the
   Mexican.

   "Yes," says the Mexican. "Thank you, fren." And he wheels and walks off at
   a good clip, down the road, and gets into a sedan and hauls out of there.

   THE NEXT DAY, HOWEVER, THE LITTLE DUDE IS BACK, WALKING along the beach
   road with a bounce, so Babbs goes out to meet him.

   "Amigo!" the guy says. "Have you seen any Russians today!"-this with a big
   sparkling grin, as if to say it's all been a grand joke among us fellows
   who are in on it.

   So Babbs thinks it over and says, Let's go up to the Polynesian palace and
   have a talk about the whole thing. Man to man.

   So the Mexican says O.K. and they head up toward town toward a Polynesian
   restaurant up the way. Well, that gets the guy away from la casa grande,
   at least. Kesey has been primed for this, ready to make a run for it in
   one of the cars. He could head for the jungle, but the jungle is such a
   total bummer. On the other hand the road out is no bargain, either. If
   they are really closing in, they could have Route 15 bottled up so fast
   he'd never make it. Well, get out of la casa grande, in any case. So he
   and Stone get into Stone's car and drive up to the bluff overlooking the
   ocean and have a couple of tokes to assess the situation.

   They park up on the bluff and look down at the festering red tide. The
   focking festering red tide. They turn the situation this way and that, and
   then Kesey decides: it is no use running either into the jungle or up the
   road. That's their game, the cops-and-robbers game. That's their movie,
   and they know their movie backward and forward, and they know how that one
   comes out, and we know how it comes out. Justice triumphs after a merry
   chase and the Fugitive eats dung dust in the last reel to show the horror
   of his dope-fiend ways. The only way out is to make it the Prankster movie
   and imagine this metallic little dude into the Prankster movie. There's no
   one to run to to say, Mommy, this movie is no fun any more, it's too real,
   Mommy. Up tight against the professed beliefs, Major, and you better
   believe! or else draggle your ass inaudible ... They get to talk about
   Fugitive movies they have seen in which the Fugitive wins out, and they
   hit upon Casablanca, the Humphrey Bogart picture. Bogart was a fugitive in
   Casablanca, in the Moroccan desert, operating a restaurant during World
   War II, aiding and abetting Resistance fighters from Europe, and the
   Nazi-type or Vichy France-type FBI man, the cop heavy, in any case, comes
   in to question him.

   "Why did you come to Casablanca?" he says.

   "For the waters," says Bogart.

   "There is no water here," says the cop heavy. "We are in the middle of the
   desert."

   "Oh?" says Bogart. "I was misinformed."

   There it is! The Movie! So Stone and Kesey drive back and join Babbs and
   the Mexican dude in the Polynesian bar.

   The Mexican dude and Babbs have been having quite a time. Six or eight
   beer bottles are on the table, and the Mexican dude is waxing very high
   and expansive, gesturing grandly, urging them to sit down and carrying on.
   He wants to know Kesey's name and Kesey says Sol Almande. Babbs has given
   him a shuck name of his own, and Stone says he is from Esquire magazine.
   He studies an expense voucher from Esquire that Stone has as if it is a
   highly suspicious document. Then he whips out his billfold from inside his
   coat and flips it open, displaying a big badge with the number 1 on it.

   "What's that?" says Babbs.

   "That! I am Agent numero uno!"

   "Se-cret A-gent Num-ber One!" says Babbs.

   "Yeah! Yeah! Right! Right! Right!" says Agent Number One, drawing his head
   back and taking an angle on Babbs. It is like a cross between Zorro and
   Nero.

   Then he goes into a history of his famous cases.

   "Eleezabeth Taylor ees coming to Mexico City? Si. That ees my case. I know
   her very well. Si. I am going around to her hotel, and she has all thees
   people-Uhhh"-he turns his hands up and pulls his chin down under his
   collarbone as if to say it is doubtful they could even comprehend how many
   people she has-"all thees functionaries doing thees and doing that, een
   the corridor outside even, and one of theem, thees beeg maricon"-meaning
   queer-"he tells me, 'No one can go een! No one.' "

   " No one, ay,' I tell heem. He ees a beeg maricon. I can tell. There ees a
   look they have, thees maricons. They have cojinas the size of habichuelas,
   one can see it een the face, een the voice ... they are soft like sheet,
   thees maricons...

   " 'Maricon!' I say to heem.

   "Hees voice, eet jes 'oops!'-you know?-like a leetle theeng of water.

   " 'Out of my way, maricon!' "-Agent Number One half leaps out of his chair
   with the reenactment, his eyes bouncing off his shades, shooting up like
   he is galvanized with a thousand volts.

   Then he sinks back.

   "We-e-e-ellll," he says very softly, and smiles like someone getting ready
   to drop off to sleep. The way he says it, you can see the maricon
   collapsing, dissolving, turning into little driblets of jelly and opening
   the door to Miss Taylor's suite.

   There is no stopping Agent Number One now. Exploit after exploit bubbles
   up in his brain. Cornered like a rat, he faces them down. About to be cut
   down in fusillades, he whips his revolver and fires one shot, one shot,
   amigo, and that takes care of that. The sonsabeetches theenk they have him
   outsmarted, ready to make their move, and he has already made his move and
   is waiting for them, like a bucket under a faucet, and so on.

   The strange thing, however, is that none of these fabulous cases has
   anything to do with celebrities. They're all marijuana cases, usually
   involving Americans. Yes.

   Finally he takes out his camera and takes a picture of each of them.

   Kesey says, "Why don't you come to our party tomorrow night? A lot of
   people will be there."

   "Your party?"

   "Yeah, we're having a farewell party tomorrow night."

   "Farewell?"

   "Yeah. We're leaving Mexico and going back up to California, so we're
   giving a farewell party."

   "Well, thank you, amigo. I weel be there."

   So began the first Mexican Acid Test

   .

   agent number one wasn't the most brilliant cop in the Americas, but time
   was obviously running out in old Mexico. It was time to get the Movie
   going on all projectors. And the bus. The new fantasy was to get on the
   bus and keep moving; roam through Mexico and give Acid Tests and be on the
   bus, keeping the Pranksters movie going at top speed at all times.

   They held the Manzanillo Test in the courtyard of Babbs's Rat Shack, under
   the aegis of the Purina Chow. It was a small one, with all random heads in
   the area welcome. No Grateful Dead, of course, so they gave the Polynesian
   restaurant latino combo ten bucks to come down the road and play during
   their intermissions. Between times the Pranksters themselves furnished the
   music, rolling all the fantastic coils of wire out, with Gretch on the
   organ, and the movies and lights and all the rest. The night was full of
   heat lightning, which was nice, and the Prankster musicians screeled their
   weird Chinese tones, wailing electronically in the Rat netherlands. But no
   Secret Agent Numero Uno.

   Kesey actually hoped the guy would turn up. He was just crazy enough to be
   adaptable for the Movie. He was a creature of fantasy himself. In any
   case, better him there gathering more data for his fabulous career than
   lurking in the cocoa palms working himself up to spring his ultimate cop
   fantasy on them. Well, if so, they would go out freaking and wailing on
   the shores of the red tide.

   The Polynesian players came down the road again and played. It was nice to
   get freaked to latino syncopation. Then a lull, and then the shit-

   !Hoy! !Pronto!

   -this piping shout from the other side of the Rat Shack. And where have I
   heard that cry before, Cosmo?

   !Hoy! !Pronto!

   And all veer stroked out waiting for the pounce. More pounce to the ounce
   in a Mexican bust. Well, let's have it-let's see the Federales do their
   fantasy to mariachis, breaking on the high notes and struggling up again
   and huffing and galomphing with gold butts and stars in their teeth

   !Hoy! !Pronto!

   Come on in, fellas, it's strictly Dutch freak here inside-

   -and around the corner comes only the owner of the Polynesian palace,
   pissed off because his combo is hung up on the crazies here long past
   intermission and he has enough problems in the red-tide doldrums without
   them malingering with the crazies.

   "!Hoy! !Pronto!" he keeps shouting. !Hurry up! Get your asses back to the
   store! prodding and herding them out of the Purina Chow palace delirium.

   !Hoy! !Pronto!

   The heat freak lightning flashes crazy enough and it is a good sign. The
   Movie is going.

   THE PRANKSTERS PULLED OUT OF MANZANILLO THE NEXT DAY without a word or a
   move from Agent Number One, big as life on the bus, plus a small caravan
   of cars. They headed to Guadalajara and gave an Acid Test in a restaurant
   there. The Test went on two nights and each night a well-dressed Mexicano
   with the gleaming nighttime Mexico white shirt over his staunch midriff
   turned up with a go-go girl and stayed right through, although they didn't
   take acid. Smiled and danced and seemed to enjoy themselves. Turned out he
   was the local jefe of detectives. We are not alone.

   The bus tooled into Aguascalientes, 364 miles northwest of Mexico City,
   loaded for Acid Tests. Aguascalientes is 6,000 feet up in tierras frescas
   with a paradise climate in late summer, a nicely weird city, built above a
   vast system of tunnels by ... an unknown race ... Pranksters in the time
   warp of many millennia ago. Suddenly Sandy was immensely enthusiastic.
   Sandy had packed his motorcycle onto the bus. He was getting more and more
   robust day by day, all for this Mexican adventure.

   The mineral springs! said Sandy. You got to try them! A warm soothing
   mineral spring bath soaking late-summer paradise into every
   bone-Cleanliness is Next. Aguascalientes was what all these tierras del
   fuego were piled up rock by rock for, this little bit of Heaven in the
   upper altitudes.

   Mountain Girl listened to all this and she knew, well, that would be that.
   They would hang around Aguascalientes the rest of the day. If there was
   one thing Kesey couldn't resist, it was the prospect of a long warm soak.
   He would stay in a warm tub one hour any time, and the paradisiacal
   Aguascalientes were good for four or five hours, easy.

   So Kesey and many Pranksters went off and immersed up to their chops in
   the warm springs. Hagen was delegated to stay behind and watch the bus and
   all the Acid Test equipment inside. Sandy went off to take a spin on his
   motorcycle.

   Presently Sandy turned back up at the bus. He looked most big and bright.
   He had on an orange jacket gleaming Day-Glo and much orange Day-Glo on his
   bike and was looking strong. Sandy climbed up in the bus and went back in
   there and presently he emerged carrying the big Ampex.

   "What are you doing with that?" says Hagen.

   "I need something heavy to put on the back of my bike for a test run,"
   says Sandy. "I'm going to be carrying a lot of stuff back to New York and
   I want to find out how much I can maneuver with on this thing."

   "Well-I don't know," says Hagen. Man, there's something wrong with this.
   "Prankster equipment isn't supposed to leave the bus. You know what the
   Chief says."

   "It's not leaving the bus," says Sandy. "I just want to take it down a few
   blocks to see how the bike handles with a weight on it."

   All the time Sandy is tying the huge clump of equipment down on the back
   rider's seat of the bike. It's so heavy and bulky it doesn't look like he
   could make ten miles with it.

   "I don't think you should," says Hagen.

   "I'll be right back," says Sandy-and he guns off, with the bike drooping
   in the back.

   An hour goes by, two hours, and he isn't back. Hagen is worried. Then
   Kesey shows up, back from the baths. Let's go! says Kesey. He sees the
   whole thing right away. The fateful Ampex that Sandy had hassled over a
   year ago. The sombitch has split.

   They jump in a car and take off up the highway north, toward Zacatecas. He
   has a big start but he won't be getting very far with that back end loaded
   down like it is. They go barreling through the Coca-Cola and Carta Blanca
   crossroads of old Mexico, up past Chicalote and Rincon de Romos and San
   Francisco, everywhere stopping and shouting at the Mex drugstore cowboys
   on the corner.

   "Hey! Have you seen a crazy gringo on a motorcycle-all dressed in orange?"

   "No." "No." "No."-the bastards, they're too battened down in their
   huaraches to say so anyway-and they barrel on up through the dung dust but
   finally give up and trail on back to the bus.

   "Shit," says Mountain Girl, "that Ampex is the guts of the Acid Test."

   The whole complicated thing of the instruments, the variable lag, the
   synchronicity, the taping for the Archives-they can't do it without the
   Ampex. Sandy has taken the Prankster Ampex-to the Pranksters there was not
   the slightest doubt in the world that the equipment was the Pranksters'.
   Not Prankster Sandy Lehmann-Haupt's but the Pranksters'. The Prankster
   family, the Prankster order, superseded all straight-world ties, contracts
   and chattel laws and who is my mother or my brethren? And he looked round
   about on them which sat about him, and said, Behold my mother and my
   brethren! For whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is my brother,
   and my sister, and my mother.

   And there was nothing left but the vision of the sombitch tooling up the
   Mexican National Highway, struggling on his Suzuki to haul.. . possessions
   back to New York. New York. So this was what he had built up the strength
   for. Six thousand freaking miles on a 250-pound motorcycle to seek out his
   electronic chattel and draggle it back, freaking Day-Glo in the sundown
   toward the border.

   ABOUT 4,500 FEET AWAY, SANDY RESTED IN THE SHADOW Behind a big corrugated
   tin shed. Out in the open sun there-the runway of the Aguascalientes
   airport with brown Mexicans in coveralls lollygagging around. Sandy had
   been a man of his word, up to a given point, so to speak. He had gone a
   couple of blocks, like he said. Then he took a right and rode on over to
   the city airport and parked behind the shed ... and waited ... and was
   Kesey really so far into Now, such a master precognition, that he would
   shoot the Zen arrow ... or let him draw it, rather, and come straight
   there and hassle him upside the bus again and in that moment let him know
   irrevocably who has the Power, the control over his mind forever ...

   Strangely, the paranoia lasted only for a twinge as he caught his breath
   in the shade. In fact, he was strangely calm, as if the chase were now
   over, rather than begun. He had done it. It had been his movie. He had
   drawn them into his scenario. Mike Hagen. "We-e-e-e-11," he had said. "I
   don't kno-o-o-ow. You know what the Chief says." He knew. He had been on
   the bus for three years. The trip had been liberation and captivity all at
   the same time, liberation, power, will, the greatest in the world-and
   whose will? The group mind's? Well, he had never had a dream war with the
   group mind, he had never been held in thrall by the group mind, he had
   never been subject to absolute judgment by the group mind, waiting for the
   one cryptic word that will say, It's O.K., Sandy.

   Naturally he could never haul the big Ampex 3,000 miles on a motorcycle.
   It would be a little pile of gleaming whimsy, like one of Paul Foster's
   acid-bag transistor radios, by the time he reached the border, from the
   interminable bouncing. But he had that figured out. There was a Railway
   Express Agency in Aguas-calientes. He would take the Ampex over there and
   ship it to New York collect and ride back on the motorcycle free as a
   bird. Which he did.

   A YEAR LATER I TALKED TO SANDY IN CENTRAL PARK, DOWN BY the edge of the
   lake near Central Park South. He looked good, strong, calm. He was going
   with a good-looking blonde whom I had met. He had a job as a sound
   engineer with one of the recording companies. We got to talking for a long
   time about his adventures with the Pranksters, and dusk came on, and we
   related what we had each heard of Kesey recently, and it started getting
   dark, so we got up and left the park. And in all of it Sandy spoke with
   warmth, about Kesey, about the whole experience, with no traces of rancor.
   It started getting dark and we got up and walked out of the park. Just
   before we parted, Sandy turned to me and said, "You know ... I'll always
   be on the bus."

   "LEO! LEO! YOU ARE LEO, AREN'T YOU? DO YOU NOT KNOW ME any more? We were
   League brothers together and should still be so. We were both travelers on
   the journey to the East."

   THE PRANKSTERS MOVED ON TO MEXICO CITY AND ENVIRONS, giving a couple of
   Acid Tests, but without any astounding gusto. American heads from the
   Ajijic-San Miguel de Allende-Mexico City Circuit gathered proudly-Yeah-I
   ran into Kesey and the Pranksters in Mexico and we all got stoned. A few
   Indians came and got taciturnly freaked.

   Meanwhile, Kesey's lawyers were hassling with Mexico City immigration
   legals in Mexico City to see about getting him a proper visa for a long
   haul, and they blew hot and cool. And then cooler and cooler. They seemed
   to be followed, the Pranksters and the bus, by carloads of well-dressed
   Mexican dudes here and there. Stone saw more than anyone else but kept
   driving. Cassady hauling the bus over the Mexico tierras frias with his
   new goal up against now of going the length and breadth of Mexico without
   using the brakes and without stopping for anything, hauling off onto
   crumbling scrubroot shoulders rather than stop for carts or cars or
   animals, smoothing out his stroke, from the Joe Cuba spastokinetic jerk,
   the sudden straight lines, into a new line-the new line-Kesey can see it
   happening even in the eternal Cassady-but of course!-in him first of
   all-from Fire to Water, from the Stone Age into the Acid Age and in a
   moment-now- Furthur-

   HAUL ASS, KESEY! IT WAS NOW TIME TO BRING THE FUTURE back to the U.S.A.,
   back to San Francisco, and brazen it out with the cops and whatever else
   there. The Mexican legals were hinting at booting him out, maybe in a
   month, on the technicality of no visa. But the Rat lands were spent
   anyway. They had junked it through on the fabulous junk of Mexico. They
   had gorged it up. They had ... in truth, Major, there were no more spas to
   water at in the Rat lands.

   The current fantasy was to take the Outlaw prank to its ultimate, be a
   Prankster Fugitive Extraordinaire in the Baskin-Robbins bosom of the
   U.S.A. You have never seen a Prankster Fugitive? Now watch that movie;
   draws you right in ...

   Kesey had a good melodrama for going back in. Paint it big enough and
   bright enough, and they will never see you. He figured to sneak back in on
   the purloined-letter principle. If you are gross enough about the whole
   thing, they will never know it's you.

   Kesey picked Brownsville, Texas, for the reentry. It was the easternmost
   entry point on the Mexican border, practically on the Gulf of Mexico, and
   the least likely spot for heads to pick to go back in at. Most of the
   heads used the western end, the Tijuana end, because they were going back
   to California.

   So he put on a cowboy hat and just before the U.S. Customs and Immigration
   Station at Brownsville raunched into view, he rented a Mexican's swayback
   white horse and got on with his cowboy hat cocked on crazily, playing a
   guitar and lolling his head around like he was drunk. He came cross the
   border lurching along on an old white horse as "Singing Jimmy Anglund."

   "How long you been in Mexico?"

   "Too damn long."

   "May I see your visa?"

   "I don't have it."

   "Where is it?"

   Visa-how the hell did he know. Came down to play a country & western show
   in that fuckin Matamoros, and be damned if they didn't get him drunk, them
   fuckin Mexes, their fuckin women and their margaritas, and they rolled his
   ass in the streets of Matamoros, took his money and his papers, cleaned
   him out, and he got drunker and he stayed drunker in this godderned
   Mexico, bricked up his bowels with terra cotta, and him just a good old
   boy from Boise, Idaho, and that's where he's going back, no more Mexico,
   no more Las Vegas-

   "Have you got any identification?"

   "All I got's this here-"

   -and he shows the browntrooper a credit card, Bank of America, reading
   James C. Anglund, Las Vegas, Nevada.

   So they let him across and he headed down the road clawing

   on the guitar and lolling around on the back of the horse, although they
   retrieved the horse from him-can't let any disease sneak across the border
   from the Rat lands, you understand-

   Singing Jimmy Anglund started thumbing out in the dust with his Rat-tar
   under the other arm ...

                                    chapter

                                      XXVI

                              The Cops and Robbers

                                      Game

   Singing Jimmy,

   Hocking hoarse and phlegmy,

   Sticks his grizzle

   In the dust-muck Brownsville drizzle,

   Starts to thumbing

   Up the Texas belly bumming,

   Heeee! the cops and robbers game.

   Lone superhero, Superhighway Cosmo hero, Never lies.

   Honesty's the best disguise In the cops and robbers game.

   See, cop fellas?

   Freaked-out head-buff Cercosporellas

   Here's my Rat-tar

   And my buckskin cowboy suit.

   Prankster red boots

   From Guadalajara.

   My cowboy hat

   Shows you where I'm at

   In the cops and robbers game.

   I ain't Clark Kent.

   I ain't Steve Lamb.

   Popeye the Sailor I am what I am

   In the cops and robbers game.

   Came a car

   Didn't take him very far

   In the cops and robbers game.

   At the wheel

   In this fuckedup dust-muck hitchhike deal

   Was a Mississippi kite

   With a smile of ebonite.

   Inchy road

   Heavy duty, heavy load

   In the cops and robbers game.

   Shit.

   The Cosmos Kid, he

   Split

   At the coffee-light eggs-lookin-atcha bus depot.

   On the bus!

   In the cops and robbers game.

   Greyhound humid

   Most mightily piss-fumid

   All the way to Salt Lake City

   On the bus

   In the cops and robbers game.

   Oh

   Riding second class

   With shock absorbers up my ass

   Reminds me

   Of the RB. Eyes left behind me

   Out front! superhero

   Of the cops and robbers game.

   Took a flight

   To San Francisco late at night.

   Cop alert?

   For hero in a buckskin shirt?

   Cocked to shoot?

   At superdude in red dude boots?

   Not hardly.

   Official mind destroyer,

   This prankster suit of flaming Orion paranoia

   Hardly visible,

   This risible cowboy

   Cardiac drummer

   Marching to a different bummer

   In the cops and robbers game.

   From the airport

   With creamy Prankster pudding escorts

   Neal and Hugh

   Day-Glo Marvel Comic crew

   Commence the movie:

   Freak the cops!

   Shuck the narcos

   Shuck the Feds

   Shuck the San Mateo Sheriff

   Shuck the San Francisco Chief

   Shuck the Judges in their chambers

   We shall not flag or fail

   We shall go on to the end

   We shall shuck you on the beaches

   We shall shuck you on the landing grounds

   We shall shuck you in the fields, in the streets, on the hills

   And in the trees.

   Groovy plot

   Hot movie

   In these trees.

   See the very hunted coons

   Salt J. Edgar Hoover's wounds!

   Yah! the cops and robbers game.

   Kesey holes up at his old friend---'s house in Palo Alto. He is in a
   strange state of mind. He is in the cops' movie now, the Cops and Robbers
   Game, and eventually they will win, because it is their movie-Gotcha!
   Unless he makes it his movie, which will take the utmost risk and daring.
   Here I am, boys... In the cops and robbers game you creep and skulk about
   in a state of tachycardia, and they like to think of you in your reptile
   misery-so-

   Break skulk!

   In short, the fantasy is now to become a kind of Day-Glo Pimpernel,
   popping up here and there, right out in public, then vanishing, reeking
   legend in the wake. He will be like one of those movie criminals who send
   florid coded notes to the police about au pair girls he intends to
   garrote-and then does it-while all the world pants for next week's broken
   hyoid bone. Only he hasn't been strangling, merely smoking grass. You
   would never know that, however, from the excitement in San Francisco ...

   A strange sort of guest to have in the house- and----------hardly knows
   what to make of the performance, Kesey veering wildly from paranoia and
   hyper-security to extraordinary disregard for his own safety, one state
   giving way to the other in no fixed order. Kesey gets up about noon or 1
   p.m., eats, then goes out in the garden out back and sits there in his
   buckskin shirt playing a Prankster flute. If one plays anything much more
   bizarre than a transistor radio out back in the garden in Palo Alto, it
   amounts to freaking insurrection; let alone a big muscular Mountain Man in
   a buckskin shirt playing a flute. Then at night-a few tokes here, a few
   tokes there, it adds up, Major, Kesey and a Prankster or two start to
   rapping, gently

   Rapping

   Cortex tapping

   Rat-tat-tatting

   Tatter-ratting

   Fooling, puling, ululation

   Skeel goose screeling glossolalia

   Crested screamers! Megascops!

   Bust the eardrums! Freak the cops!

   until 2 a.m. the house would be reeling with enough Rat-tars, loon cries,
   tapes and howling grass euphoria to wake up all of sweet dream tunnel Palo
   Alto for the next fifteen years-but then suddenly at 4 a.m., or 5, after
   outlasting everyone in the mad howl, Kesey would suddenly decide it was
   time for maximum security precautions and would disappear into the cellar
   to a snug nest behind the packing cases, in the cobwebs. Well, at least
   the bastards won't get him with Gestapo tap on the shoulder-All right,
   Kesey ...

   That movie-but then awakening and starting his movie almost at once. Neal,
   Hugh Romney, Kesey and a small detachment of Hell's Angels head for a
   three-day "trips festival" in progress at San Francisco State College,
   Saturday night, October 1. The seeds one has sown... The Acid Tests have
   already caught hold in the college world. San Francisco State has become
   the acid heads' true universitas, sort of the way Ohio State is for
   football freaks. They are trying the whole thing, the Acid Test, with the
   utmost faithful eclecticism.

   Alpha,

   Beta,

   Delta Handa Poker.

   Movies at the smoker.

   Collegiate!

   Donkey beads,

   Temple bells,

   Sandles and

   Mandalas

   Psychedelic!

   The Hell's Angels are riding shotgun for the Fugitive. They like this.
   They can freak out any approaching cops, in cruiser or battalion. For some
   suitable weird reason all the lights are left on in the campus buildings.
   The festival is in the gymnasium-full of scaffolding and people sweeping
   the ceilings with movies and light projections-Control towers-and the
   Grateful Dead on the bandstand, all careful homage to the original Acid
   Tests, and then suddenly

   Kesey

   will be there, broadcasting into the gymnasium from a campus radio station
   ... a very tight ship, this fantasy, even up to Hell's Angels standing
   guard outside the studio. Except that by the time they get all the wiring
   hooked up, and start rapping, Cassady with a microphone inside the
   hall-introducing

   Ken Keeeee-Zeeeeee

   it is about 4 a.m. Kesey is hidden in the studio, talking over the hugest
   Prankster hookup of wires, running long over the college campus to the
   gymnasium. Freewheeling Frank, the Hell's Angel, zonked on acid, barges
   into the studio, and sees Kesey there sitting on a stool with an electric
   guitar and wires running all around his legs and his neck, branging on the
   guitar, rapping poetry into the microphone with fluorescent light and on
   the air sign filling up the room-The god of LSD-He's so wired up it scares
   me-This god reminds me of a satellite that flies around in the
   skies-whereupon Frank hugs him and feels an immediate surge of electricity
   and sits down on the floor and starts playing a harmonica and Kesey raps
   on for the benefit of the hundreds watching the swirling light shows in
   the gymnasium: "You who stand sit and crawl around and about the floor
   about you and above you on the ceiling that madness that's running in
   color is your brain!"-and then he stalks out of the room-

   He's mad because he has not captured my mind-thinks Frank-he has so many
   million minds that he has captured that not even a smile is left on his
   face.

   But there were no millions or even hundreds left in the gymnasium because
   it was so late it was down to a group of hard-core heads, many of whom
   were so high they were used to all sorts of time and geography warps.
   Everything was real, Mani, Madame Blavatsky's Chohan maya, Ken Kesey
   broadcasting over the p.a. system ... Kesey finally comes out and walks
   through the residue, but they are all wacked out and he is hardly visible
   ... in his Prankster suit of flaming Orion paranoia . . .

   Nevertheless! the word is now out among the heads of Haight-Ashbury. Kesey
   is back, the Man, the Castro who won them what they have today in the
   first place. The seeds we ...

   . . . HAVE SOWN . . . DOWN IN RAT LAND RED TIDE MANZANILLO, Kesey and the
   Pranksters had been so cut off they got almost no news from San Francisco.
   It was all perfect Devil's Island down there. They had only a dim idea of
   what was going on among the heads in Haight-Ashbury. But now, like, you
   don't even have to look for it. It hits you in the face. It's a whole
   carnival... All you have to do is walk up into the Haight-Ashbury-and
   Kesey chances a run through ... Hell, in Haight-Ashbury a muscular guy in
   cowboy boots and a cowboy hat-he ... looks healthy. The cops are busy
   trying to figure out these new longhairs, these beatniks-these crazies are
   somehow weirder than the North Beach beatniks ever were. They glow blue
   like a TV tube. The hippie-dippies.. . their Jesus hair, men with hair
   falling down to the shoulders and beards to their chests, all lank and
   thin and limp like... lungers! Sergeant, they're lollygagging up against
   the storefronts on Haight Street up near that Psychedelic Shop like
   somebody hocked a bunch of T.B. lungers up against windows and they've
   oozed down to the sidewalks, staring at you with these huge zombie eyes,
   just staring. And a lot of weird American Indian and Indian from India
   shit, beaded headbands and donkey beads and temple bells-and the live
   ones, promenading up and down Haight Street in costumes, or half-costumes,
   like some kind of a doorman's coat with piping and crap but with blue
   jeans for pants and Mod boots.. . The cops!-oh, how it messed up their
   minds.

   The cops knew drunks and junkies by heart, and they knew about LSD, but
   this thing that was going on . . . The heads could con the cops blind and
   it was wild. Haight-Ashbury had always been a brave little tenement
   district up the hill from the Panhandle entrance to Golden Gate Park, with
   whites and Negroes living next door in peace. Rents had been going up in
   North Beach. A lot of young couples with bohemian enthusiasms had been
   moving to Haight-Ashbury. Some of the old beats had moved in. They hung
   around a place called the Blue Unicorn. But the Trips Festival of eight
   months before was what really kicked the whole thing off. Eight
   months!-and all of a sudden it was like the Acid Tests had taken root and
   sprung up into people living the Tests like a whole life style.

   The Grateful Dead had moved into a house in Haight-Ashbury, and it wasn't
   just the old communal living where everybody piled into some place. They
   lived in Prankster-style, as a group with a name and a mission, which was
   music and the psychedelic vision ... Yes... A thin, almost caved-in guy
   with incredible freaking light-brown Jesus hair and beard flowing all over
   him and round wire-rim spectacles, named Chet Helms, had a group called
   the Family Dog. They also lived in Prankster-style, in a garage at 1090
   Page, holding rock 'n' roll dances amid a lot of Indian symbols. They had
   taken part in the Trips Festival. Helms was a head but a very practical
   head. He saw it coming, with the Trips Festival, the whole wave. He
   started an ongoing Trips Festival, every week, selling tickets, at a
   ballroom, the Avalon, at Van Ness and Sutter. Bill Graham, the impresario
   for the Trips Festival, was into the thing too and had a Trips Festival
   scene going in the Fillmore Auditorium, a dancehall at Fillmore and Geary.
   Graham and Kesey had had a falling out at the Trips Festival itself over
   things like who was going to handle the gate and it ended in a badass
   moment when Graham put out his hand to shake and make up and Kesey just
   looked at it and walked away. But Graham picked up on the Acid Test format
   exactly. Both the Fillmore and the Avalon did the Pranksters Acid Test
   with all the mixed media stuff, the rock 'n' roll and movie projections
   and the weird intergalactic amoeba light shows. The Avalon even had it
   down to details like the strobes and sections of the floor where you could
   play with Day-Glo paint under black light. Everything but the . .. fourth
   dimension ... Cosmo ... the three o'clock thing ... the experience, the
   kairos... They know where it is, but they don't know what it is... Still,
   the ballrooms were like a big announcement and a front door ... into The
   Life.

   The new communal groups themselves were into the pudding. Like the
   Diggers, led by a guy named Emmett Grogan, whose hero was Kesey. They went
   in for pranks. They had a Frame of Reference, a huge frame nine feet tall
   that they set up in the street and asked people to walk through ... "so
   we'll all be in the same frame of reference." Then they started handing
   out free food to all comers, heads, winos, anybody, at 4 p.m. in the
   Panhandle part of the park. The food they cadged from wholesalers, and
   boosted, and so on. It was a goddamn sketch, seeing them ladle out the
   stew every day out of big milk cans... Up at Fulton and Scott is a great
   shambling old Gothic house, a freaking decayed giant, known as The Russian
   Embassy. A new group called the Calliope Company lives in there, led by
   Bill Tara, an actor. Many colorful characters like Paul Hawken, and
   Michael Laton, who always wears a Russian astrakhan hat, and Jack the
   Fluke, who is a laughing grizzly Irishman with a beard like an Airedale
   and a cab driver's cap and flapping tweeds bought from the Slightly Soiled
   Shop ... all of them sitting around the great parlor, bare but a glory of
   old carved wood, fourteen-foot ceilings... Jack the Fluke tells about his
   girlfriend Sandra, a teenage girl who just pulled in from Bucks County,
   Pa.:

   "I come in"-and he motions with his head up toward his room on the top
   floor-"and, dig: she has a joint rolled this big, like a cigar, man!-and
   she's goofing off the radio and puffing on this, I mean, Corona corona
   joint and goofing and puffing-it was beautiful! It really takes me back."

   But of course! the esoteric nostalgia of those first days of discovery,
   the first little easing open of the doors of the mind with marijuana and
   that thing you do at that stage!-that goofing off the radio thing-You
   know? And it's beautiful, the kids beginning to pour in to Haight-Ashbury
   ... for The Life ... It's a carnival! the Garden of Eden! one big urban La
   Honda scene! right out in the open! with all things available. Money is
   floating around in the air. That's no hassle. Hell, in three hours you can
   pick up nine or ten bucks panhandling. Christ, when the straight citizens
   see a kid in a beard and beads and flowers with a sign around his neck
   saying My Heart is Prouder than my Stomach, it fucking blows their minds,
   and they lay quarters on you, dollar bills. It's too much. And if worse
   comes to worse, there is always ...

   "Anybody want a straight job?" says a girl named Jeannie, who lives here
   at The Embassy. Michael Laton says yeah, and it turns out Jeannie is
   working three or four hours a night as a Topless Shoe Shine girl in a
   little shoeshine shack on Broadway in North Beach, and they need a barker
   outside on the sidewalk to spiel in customers. Michael Laton takes this,
   yes, straight job, and stands out there at night in a tuxedo and a tall
   hat hawking in the dentists who are crawling all over North Beach panting
   over the Topless. They come inside the shack and climb up on the shoeshine
   stand and put their feet on the shoeshine stirrups and watch Jeannie's
   tits dangle and jiggle for ninety seconds while she shines their shoes for
   two dollars and a big lugubrious spade stands by with his hand near a lead
   beer bottle to smash wiseguys and sex fiends with and they all come out
   saying the exact same thing: "And the funny part is, it's a damned good
   shoeshine!"

   "... so I dropped a little acid, like just for the flash, you know," says
   Michael Laton, "and these two Marines come up, this big sergeant and
   another one, with hashmarks on their sleeves, like up to here. I'm eight
   feet tall by this time, and they're like ants, I'm so stoned, and I yell
   right in their faces: 'If they stop the war, you guys will be out of a
   job!' And the sergeant says Yeahhh?-and man! like it reverses-now they're
   eight feet tall all of a sudden and I'm an ant! and . .."

   A very carnival! and it wasn't politics, what he said, just a prank,
   because the political thing, the whole New Left, is all of a sudden like
   over on the hip circuit around San Francisco, even at Berkeley, the very
   citadel of the Student Revolution and all. Some kid who could always be
   counted on to demonstrate for the grape workers or even do dangerous
   things like work for CORE in Mississippi turns up one day-and immediately
   everybody knows he has become a head. His hair has the long jesuschrist
   look. He is wearing the costume clothes. But most of all, he now has a
   very tolerant and therefore withering attitude toward all those who are
   still struggling in the old activist political ways for civil rights,
   against Vietnam, against poverty, for the free peoples. He sees them as
   still trapped in the old "political games," unwittingly supporting the
   oppressors by playing their kind of game and using their kind of tactics,
   while he, with the help of psychedelic chemicals, is exploring the
   infinite regions of human consciousness ... Paul Hawken here in The
   Embassy-in 1965 he was an outstanding activist, sweat shirts and blue
   jeans and toggle coats, went on the March from Selma, worked as a
   photographer for CORE in Mississippi, risked his life to take pictures of
   Negro working conditions, and so on. Now he's got on a great Hussar's coat
   with gold frogging. His hair is all over his forehead and coming around
   his neck in terrific black Mykonos curls.

   "I take it you aren't too tight with CORE any more."

   He just laughs.

   "What about all the things you were involved in last year?"

   "All that's changed. You should have seen them leaving for Sacramento"-Cal
   students leaving Berkeley for Sacramento and a demonstration.

   "Yeah," says Tara.

   "It was all fraternity men with sports shirts and crew cuts and their own
   cars and painted signs, you know, like you get from a commercial artist.
   There was a lot of bread out there."

   "Yeah," says Tara, "and they're all talking about channels. They're going
   to do this and that through existing channels, or they can't do this or
   that through existing channels, they're all talking about channels."

   "Yeah," says Paul, "and shaking their fists"-he raises his fist and shakes
   it in a big shuck way-"and saying, 'We're off to Sacramento to protest,
   with our dates!' It's all changed. It's all a bunch of fraternity men in
   their Mustangs."

   A bunch of fraternity men in their Mustangs! In the intellectual-hip world
   of California, there is no more scathing epithet imaginable. A bunch of
   fraternity men in their Mustangs. Just savor it. Oh Mario, and Dylan, and
   Joan Baez, oh Free Speech and Anti-Vietnam-who in his right mind would
   have ever dreamed it could come to this in twelve months-abandoned to the
   supermarket and the breezeway scions-a bunch of fraternity men in
   Mustangs-and it is, unbelievably, all as the provocateur Kesey has
   prophesied it, droning on his goddamned harmonica and saying Just walk
   away and say fuck it...

   Square hip! Boy Scout bohemians! and the great rallies at Berkeley that
   used to pull 10,000 are now lucky to get a thousand. All changed! Even the
   thing with the spades. All of a sudden the Negroes are out of the hip
   scene, except for a couple of pushers like Superspade and a couple of
   characters like Gaylord and Heavy. The explanation around Haight-Ashbury
   is that Negroes don't take to LSD. The big thing with spades on the hip
   scene has always been the quality known as cool. And LSD freaking well
   blows that whole lead shield known as cool, like it brings you right out
   front, hang-ups and all. Also the spades don't get much of a kick out of
   the nostalgia for the mud that all the white middle-class kids who are
   coming to Haight-Ashbury like, piling into pads and living freaking basic,
   you understand, on greasy mattresses on the floor that the filthiest spade
   walkup in Fillmore wouldn't have, and slopping up soda pop and shit out of
   the same bottle, just passing it around from mouth to mouth, not being
   hung up on that old American plumbing&hygiene thing, you understand, even
   grokking the weird medieval vermin diseases that are flashing through
   every groin-crab lice! you know that thing, man, where you first look down
   at your lower belly and see these little scars, they look like, little
   scabs or something, tiny little mothers, and like you pick one, root it
   out, and it starts crawling] Oh shit! and then they're all crawling and
   you start exploring your mons pubis and your balls and they're alive. It's
   like a jungle you never saw before, in your own crotch, your own shag, and
   it's alive, a freaking bestiary, in fact, the little bastids, like
   soft-shell crabs that could dance on the head of a pin, and you keeping
   picking them off but every time you look you see eight more creeping over
   the veld and the savannas and you practically go blind staring at the
   little Africa down there between your legs and it's A-200 Time, man-A-200!
   Pyrinate Liquid-the only solution-that little green bottle, man! do you
   remember] and so on. .. Nostalgia for the mud!... The ...

   ... Life ... Even down in a place like La Jolla, in north San Diego, the
   poshest resort on the Pacific beaches, T---, one of the great young
   surfers, turns up one day with a three-wheel trunk motorcycle, the kind
   drugstore delivery boys use, and he pulls up into one driveway after
   another and the kids come out and-help yourself.-and he's got every pill
   and capsule you ever imagined, plus lids of grass, and ... The Life is on.
   Even devoted surfing cliques like the Pump House Gang-the mysterioso sea
   and all that!-are easing into The Life, and some move up the beach from
   the Pump House, away from the everlasting sets of goodsurfing waves they
   used to wait for like Phrygian sacristans, up from the Pump House to the
   Parking Lot, where they sit in cars with special amethyst-tinted windows
   and grok in fullness the Pacific sun as it comes through the weird glass
   and the cops wonder what in hell they're doing in cars all day instead of
   being on the beach, and they roust them and search the cars and find
   nothing, but warn-We know you kids are drinking beer out here... Beer! .
   .. One of the Pump House Gang leaders, Artie, pulls into Haight-Ashbury,
   because this is the underground word in The Life in all the high schools
   in California already, even though Haight-Ashbury has never been mentioned
   in the newspapers ... Haight-Ashbury! they know the whole new legend,
   right down to Owsley, now known as The White Rabbit, the paranoid acid
   genius . . . Artie pulls into Haight-Ashbury, walking along amid those
   endless staggers of bay windows, slums with a view, and who is sitting out
   on a curbing on Haight Street but J--- of Pump House days gone by, just
   sitting there with an Emporium shopping bag beside him.

   "Hi, J---!"

   J---just barely glances at him and says, "Oh, hi, Artie," as if naturally
   they're both in Haight-Ashbury and have been for years, and then he says,
   "Here, have a lid," and he reaches in the shopping bag and just offers him
   a whole lid of grass, free, out in the open .. . Artie looks up Anchovy's
   communal pad. Anchovy, who was little known in La Jolla in the old surfing
   days, he wasn't a surfer, is now a beautiful person and the good shepherd
   in Haight-Ashbury for all the La Jolla kids up here. Artie makes the
   rounds in Haight-Ashbury and it's ... a carnival!-everybody working for
   the Management in wondrous ways, popping Owsley LSD up from out of Pez
   candy dispensers, smoking grass, taking methedrine and fucking and
   carrying on wherever and whenever they feel like it, on the streets
   practically ... Later Anchovy has love-ins called Trans-Love Airways going
   on the San Diego campus of the University, and everybody is freaking out
   on the grass to the loudest rock 'n' roll in history and smoking grass in
   a goddamned green cloud, f'r chrissake, and taking movies of it all for
   ... the archives, and they're allied now with real people, Good People, a
   motorcycle band known as the Pallbearers, the local version ... of the
   Hell's Angels ... ah umm-mmm ... and Artie leans up against a tree smoking
   a fake joint rolled of plain Bull Durham tobacco, because you got to look
   like you're into the thing at all times ... but, in fact, it is getting to
   be too much... About nine different constabularies stage a mass raid to
   wipe out the dope plague from the San Diego County high schools and they
   pounce on La Colonia Tijuana, which means the Tijuana Slums, name here in
   La Jolla underground for the apartments a lot of people in The Life share
   this summer near the beach, and some good Pump House souls are busted, but
   that is The Life, the world divided into surfer heads and surfer lames...
   Besides, it was a laugh and a half, the look on the cops' faces when they
   saw the ceilings of La Colonia Tijuana, canopied in huge laceworks of
   interlocked pop-top rings off beer cans billowing in such groovy silvery
   ripples of grokkable reflections...

   The Probation Generation! Not the Lost Generation or the Beat Generation
   or the Silent Generation or even the Flower Generation, but the Probation
   Generation, with kids busted right and left up and down the coast for
   grass, and all get off the first time, on probation-What's probation!-with
   this millennium at hand, and it is, because there's no earthly stopping
   this thing. It's like a boulder rolling down a hill-you can watch it and
   talk about it and scream and say Shit! but you can't stop it. It's just a
   question of where it's going to go. Right now there are two ways it can go
   in Haight-Ashbury. One is the Buddhist direction, the Leary thing. There
   are good heads like Michael Bowen and Gary Goldhill who want to start the
   League for Spiritual Discovery here and pull the whole movement together
   into one church and give it a focus and even legal respectability. And
   they have given up much for this dream. Goldhill is a beautiful head! He
   is an Englishman who was writing this experimental stuff for TV in England
   and the BBC sent him to the U.S. to apply for a big grant, a Guggenheim or
   something, and he took a vacation in Mexico and ran into some American
   heads in San Miguel de Allende who said, Man, you got to come back here
   when the rainy seasons start and take some magic mushrooms, and damned if
   they didn't send him a telegram in Guadalajara or wherever - rains came
   mushrooms up-and he returned out of curiosity and took the mushrooms, just
   as Leary had, and discovered the Management and gave up all, all the TV
   BBC game and dedicated himself to The Life ... And Bowen has an apartment
   with India-print spreads lining the walls and couches on the floor and
   hand-made Indian teapots and cups and three small crystals suspended from
   the ceiling by almost invisible threads and picking up lights like jewels
   in the air, a place devoid of all the shit and gadgetry of the modern
   American plastic life, for, as Leary has said, a home should be a place of
   purity that the Gautama Buddha himself could walk into from 485 b.c. and
   feel at home. For some day grass must grow again in the streets, in
   pastoral purity, for life is shit, a duress of bad karmas, endless fight
   against catastrophe, which is to be warded off finally only by utter
   purification of the soul, utter passivity in which one becomes nothing...
   but a vessel of the All... the All-one ...

   ... as against the Kesey direction, which has become the prevailing life
   style of Haight-Ashbury . . . beyond catastrophe . . . like, picking up on
   anything that works and moves, every hot wire, every tube, ray, volt,
   decibel, beam, floodlight and combustion of American flag-flying neon
   Day-Glo America and winding it up to some mystical extreme carrying to the
   western-most edge of experience-

   The Day... was coming, but the movement lacked a single great charismatic
   leader, a visionary who could pull the whole thing together. Leary was too
   old, heading toward fifty years old, and too remote somehow, holed up in
   Millbrook, N.Y. As for Kesey-he is swamp-bound in exile in some
   alligator-infested Mexican hideaway, it was presumed ... Yet here come the
   Merry Pranksters pulling back into San Francisco from Mexico via their own
   route ... The Calliope Company gives them their Warehouse on Harriet
   Street to live in for a month, a place Tara wants to turn into a theater,
   an old garage in an abandoned hotel in the Tenderloin where Jack Dempsey
   used to train in a special amphitheater with a sloping wooden floor now
   all fully claimed by the vermin and the winos-but Colored Power! and the
   Day-Glo bus and the Pranksters come rolling in, and good heads start
   gathering around in the Day-Glo gloom of the place, like the Telepathic
   Kid who gets unspoken messages-we need beds- and he climbs a ladder and
   starts rigging the platforms on the theater scaffolding in here ... as the
   Pranksters assemble from all over, Hermit-back from dark adventures in
   Napa Valley; Stewart Brand and Lois Jennings-back from the Southwest; Paul
   Foster-back from India ... all joining the veteran Mexican band, Cassady,
   Babbs, Gretch, Mountain Girl, Faye and the children, Ram Rod, Hagen, Page,
   Doris Delay, Zonker, Black Maria ...

   ... and all at once it dawns, the main truth, spreading over the jungle
   drums all over the Haight-Ashbury: Kesey himself is back, too ::::: The
   Man ::::

   SUCH WAS THE BACKGROUND OF THE UNDERGROUND SUMMIT meeting between Kesey
   and Owsley. It was as crazy a scene as anybody ever dreamed up. For a
   start, it was in the apartment of Margot St. James, which looks like she
   once read a historical novel about a Roman banquet. The meeting began to
   shape up as a debate. Owsley, the White Rabbit, was sitting over here-and
   Kesey, the Fugitive, was sitting over there. Owsley was dressed like an
   uptown head-long hair, a dueling shirt with billowing sleeves, a
   sleeveless jacket, and beads, amulets, mandalas hanging down over his
   chest, tight pants and high boots. Kesey had on his buckskin shirt and
   tight ginger-corduroy pants and the Guadalajara red Prankster boots-and he
   was in a chuckling, giggling mood. Standing around, along with Margot,
   were various Pranksters, Haight-Ashbury heads, San Francisco State heads,
   Berkeley heads, and two or three Hell's Angels, including Terry the Tramp.

   Kesey presents his theory of going "beyond acid." You find what you came
   to find when you're on acid and we've got to start doing it without acid;
   there's no use opening the door and going through it and then always going
   back out again. We've got to move on to the next step... This notion has
   Owsley slightly freaked, naturally. He has his voice wound all the way up:

   "Bullshit, Kesey! It's the drugs that do it. It's all the drugs, man. None
   of it would have happened without the drugs"-and so forth.

   Kesey keeps cocking his head to one side and giggling in the upcountry
   manner and saying: "No, it's not the drugs. In fact"-chuckle, giggle-"I'm
   going to tell everyone to start doing it without the drugs"-and so forth.

   People in the room start following this exchange like a tennis match, the
   heads batting this way and that. One unfortunate kid from San Francisco
   State happens to get into this state of obsession about one foot in front
   of Terry the Tramp. He keeps edging closer and batting his head around,
   and edging in closer, until he is standing in front of Terry the Tramp and
   cutting off his line of vision, which is bad enough, but then he has to
   take out a cigarette and light it, all of this practically in Terry the
   Tramp's face, or within a couple of feet of it, which is all the same to
   Terry.

   One billow comes up from the kid's cigarette and Terry the Tramp says,
   "Hey, man, how about a cigarette?"

   He says it with a tone you have to hear to fully comprehend. It is the
   patented Hell's Angels tone of soft grinning menace, kind of like the tone
   the second-story man uses on the watchdog, "Come here, fel-la... (so I can
   squash your head with this brick)." He says it soft, but it stops the
   whole room like High Noon.

   "Hey, man, how about a cigarette?"

   The kid smells debacle in the air. It registers from his solar plexus to
   his earthworm lips. But he hasn't quite figured out what it's all about.
   He just hurries into his shirt pocket and takes out the cigarettes and
   shakes one free and offers it to Terry the Tramp, who takes it and puts it
   in his pocket. Then he says, with the soft grin menace smile snaking up
   out of his beard:

   "How about another one?"

   The kid mumbles O.K. and fishes into his pocket and shakes loose another
   cigarette and Terry the Tramp takes it and puts it into his pocket. The
   kid, meantime, is frozen, like a rabbit frozen by the eyebeams of a
   cougar. He knows it is time to split, but he can't move. He is stricken
   and fascinated by his own impending destruction. It's like there is
   nothing to do but play out the sequence. He puts the cigarettes back in
   his pocket- and precisely then, naturally, comes again the milky atropine:

   "How about another one?"

   O.K.-and Terry the Tramp takes another one and the kid puts them back in
   his pocket and Terry the Tramp says,

   "How about another one?"

   O.K.-and Terry the Tramp takes another one, and now every eye in the room
   watches the rabbit and the snake, panting for the next broken hyoid
   bone-how many cigarettes does the kid have left, fans? Eight-ten?-and what
   then, after all the cigarettes are gone?

   How about your shirt?

   O.K.-uhhh-

   How about your boots?

   O.K.-uhh-

   How about your pants?

   O.K.-uhhh-

   And now your HIDE, mother!

   My ... hide!

   Your very HIDE, mother! Your very ASS ! The last vestige of your pride and
   honor!  AAARRRRRRRCHHHHHHHHH!!!! ... and his bones crunched like baked
   baby ortolans ...

   Everyone in the room can see the entire movie in an instant, like some
   crucible of the prison brutes, Terry the Tramp slowly picking meat off the
   turkey-fascinating!-stay tuned in for next week's broken hyoid bone!-

   -until a couple of Pranksters intervene, with overtones of He's just a
   baby, Terry, don't snuff him. So the Kesey-Owsley debate resumed.

   It was a small moment. No heads were broken. Certainly, the Angels have
   done worse. The kid even got away that night with a whole half a pack of
   cigarettes. Yet it stuck in the throat. One way or another, the Hell's
   Angels came to symbolize the side of the Kesey adventure that panicked the
   hip world. The Angels were too freaking real. Outlaws? they were outlaws
   by choice, from the word go, all the way out in Edge City. Furthur! The
   hip world, the vast majority of the acid heads, were still playing the
   eternal charade of the middle-class intellectuals-Behold my wings!
   Freedom! Flight!-but you don't actually expect me to jump off that cliff,
   do you? It is the eternal game in which Clement Attlee, bald as Lenin,
   lively as a toy tank, yodels blood to the dockworkers of Liverpool-and
   dies buried in striped pants with a magenta sash across his chest and a
   coin with the Queen's likeness upon each eyelid. In their heart of hearts,
   the heads of Haight-Ashbury could never stretch their fantasy as far out
   as the Hell's Angels. Overtly, publicly, they included them in-suddenly,
   they were the Raw Vital Proles of this thing, the favorite minority,
   replacing the spades. Privately, the heads remained true to their class,
   and to its visceral panics ... One trouble with this Kesey was, he really
   meant it.

   but! step up the movie, he suddenly turned up one afternoon at Ed
   McClanahan's creative-writing class at Stanford. He sticks his head in the
   door and smiles from underneath a cowboy hat and says, "Happy birthday, Ed
   ..." In truth, it is his birthday. Then he comes on in, the Fugitive in
   buckskin shirt and red Guadalajara boots; tells the students why he wants
   to move beyond writing to more ... electric forms... then vanishes, that
   damned Pimpernel.

   Then the Haight-Ashbury heads held the first big "be-in," the Love
   Festival on October 7, on the occasion of the California law against LSD
   going into effect. Thousands of heads piled in, in high costume, ringing
   bells, chanting, dancing ecstatically, blowing their minds one way and
   another and making their favorite satiric gesture to the cops, handing
   them flowers, burying the bastids in tender fruity petals of love. Oh
   christ, Tom, the thing was fantastic, a freaking mindblower, thousands of
   high-loving heads out there messing up the minds of the cops and everybody
   else in a fiesta of love and euphoria. And who pops up in the middle of it
   all, down in the panhandle strip of the Golden Gate Park, but the
   Pimpernel, in Guadalajara boots and cowboy suit, and just as the word gets
   to ricocheting through the crowd real good-Kesey's here! Kesey's here-he
   vanishes, accursed Pimpernel.

   Just in case there was anybody left who didn't get the Gestalt here, Kesey
   made his big move in the press. He met with Donovan Bess, a reporter for
   the San Francisco Chronicle, and gave him the story of his flight to
   Mexico and his plans, as The Fugitive. The story was a real barn burner,
   Secret Interview with Fugitive Wanted by FBI, with all the trimmings,
   awash in screamers all across the San Francisco Chronicle. The line that
   captured all imaginations was where Kesey said:

   "I intend to stay in this country as a fugitive, and as salt in J. Edgar
   Hoover's wounds."

   Then-this next prank was beautiful. A TV interview. The Fugitive on TV,
   while all, F B. Eyes and everyone, watch helpless as the full face of the
   Fugitive, Kesey, beams forth into every home and bar and hospital and
   detective bureau in the Bay Area. It was beautiful to even think about,
   this prank. It was set up, much sly planning, with Roger Grimsby, a San
   Francisco television personality, on Station KGO, the local ABC outlet.
   The fantasy was that Grimsby would tape an interview with Kesey in a
   hideaway in the Portrero section of San Francisco, which was far away from
   both Haight-Ashbury and North Beach, and then put it on the air a couple
   of days later, October 20, a Friday. This fantasy came off like a dream.
   Grimsby taped the interview, and all was cool, and on Friday afternoon
   Kesey's face beamed into every home, bar, hospital and detective bureau,
   saying it all again, in person:

   "I intend to stay in this country as a fugitive, and as salt in J. Edgar
   Hoover's wounds. .."

   See the very hunted coons

   Salt J. Edgar Hoover's wounds!

   Yah! the cops and robbers game.

   All that remains to be done is the grand finale. Fugitive Extraordinaire!
   In this fantasy Kesey will present himself in person, in the
   flesh-Kesey!-only inches away from the greatest collection of cops in the
   history of the drug scene and then

   Vanish

   like Mandrake. The Pranksters will hold a monster trips festival, the Acid
   Test of all times, the ultimate, on Halloween, in San Francisco's largest
   hall, Winterland, for all the heads on the West Coast or coast to coast
   and galaxy to galaxy. Naturally, the cops will converge on this hideous
   bacchanal to watch for Kesey and other felons and bad actors. But of
   course! An integral part of the fantasy! It will be a masked ball, this
   Test. Nobody will know which freak is who. At the midnight hour, Kesey,
   masked and disguised in a Superhero costume, on the order of Captain
   America of the Marvel Comics pantheon, will come up on stage and deliver
   his vision of the future, of the way "beyond acid." Who is this
   apocalyptic- Then he will rip off his mask-Why-it's Ken Kee-zee!-and as
   the law rushes for him, he will leap up on a rope hanging down from the
   roof at center stage and climb, hand over hand, without even using his
   legs, with his cape flying, straight up, up, up, up through a trap door in
   the roof, to where Babbs will be waiting with a helicopter, Captain
   Midnight of the U.S. Marines, and they will ascend into the California
   ozone looking down one last time into the upturned moon faces of all the
   put-on, nonplused, outwitted, befuddled befreaked shucked! constables and
   sleuths Yeah! Yeah! Right! Right! Right!

   right right right right an even even even even even world twenty-five
   minutes after the Grimsby TV show Friday afternoon, October 20, Kesey and
   Hassler driving out of San Francisco on the Bayshore freeway, toward Palo
   Alto, in an old red panel truck. The current fantasy . . . this movie is
   too real, Mommy-but they have actually pulled it off. They have just been
   in town in the hideaway watching Kesey the Fugitive on TV, and this prank
   was too beautiful. The FBI and all cops everywhere shucked in the most
   public galling way. The sun slants down on the Bayshore freeway in the
   afternoon and all the shiny black-shoe multitudes are out in their
   300-horsepower fantasy cars heading into the rush hour, out the freeway,
   toward the waiting breezeway slots. It's actually peaceful, this rush hour

   We pulled it off

   thousands of cars sailing up the swooping expressway like so many Salt
   Flat Futur-o-matics with taillight bands like hard red candy ... It's
   relaxing, the rush hour is, and hypnotic, it drones, and it winks like red
   hard candy with the sun shining through it, and the sun shines in Kesey's
   side of the panel truck, very relaxing, and he takes off his disguise, the
   cowboy hat and dark glasses

   See the very hunted coons

   Salt j. edgar hoover's wounds

   Hassler, driving, vaguely aware of the cars floating by in the rush hour,
   shiny hulls with so many shaved globes sticking up inside ...

   Kesey!

   Suddenly coming up on his left Hassler sees a car full of shiny haircut
   faces, jammed full of them, all staring at them-Hassler and Kesey-and now
   gray Alumicron arms flapping out the

   window, stabbing and motioning Pull Over, much grimacing and shouting
   soundlessly into the slipstream of the rush hour, and one with his wallet
   dangling out the window, flapping his badge at them

   Run! Split! Vanish!

   But there is no place to vanish to. It is all clear in a flash-trapped in
   the rush hour for a start-and the panel truck can't outrun their sedan
   anyway. Opposite side pickoff!-Hassler tries to squeeze between cars and
   lose them that way, like a basketball play, but it's no use. The cops keep
   floating abreast, grimacing and flapping, and drifting back and pulling
   even again

   There !

   Kesey motions to the shoulder of the expressway, by an embankment and
   Hassler cuts over there, skids to a stop

   Thrash !

   Kesey out the door and plunges over the guardrail and down the embankment,
   with the dust flying . . .

   Hassler just sits there as the sedan skids to a stop in front of him,
   cutting him off. Seems like twenty doors fly open, haircut faces and
   gray-Alumicron bodies popping out in every direction, leaping over the
   guardrail-

   All in shiny black shoes

   One orders Hassler out of the panel truck and Hassler gets out and sits
   down on the edge of the freeway. Very strange. The great swarm of cars
   with hard-candy tails keeps sailing past, hypnotically. Hassler gets into
   the lotus position, sitting cross-legged on the asphalt, looking straight
   ahead. Three sets of

   Shiny black FBI shoes

   standing around him now. They all have these shiny black shoes on. Then
   one of them goes back to the sedan and comes back with a flare gun and
   stands over him with that. Hassler wonders if he intends to shoot him with
   a flare. A very Day-Glo death. Thread-soul, the causal body, ablation,
   Upanishads, Krishnamurti, the karmic vestiture of the soul, the nirvanic
   consciousness-it all runs together right here, like a tinned stew, and
   Hassler isn't even high. On the other side of the expressway, on the edge
   of the bay, great fat seagulls are wheeling in the air in a great weird O
   pattern, coasting down below the level of the highway, then struggling up,
   dripping garbage out of their gullets, but a nice pattern, all in all-

   The Visitacion Drain

   It's the Visitacion Drain they've picked to work out their karma in ...
   ah, we're synched up this afternoon .. . and the gulls wax fat gulping
   garbage at the drain and grease a slippery fat O in the sky and it occurs
   to Hassler that today is his twenty-seventh birthday.

   Skidding down the embankment chocking up dust like in a Western the blur
   of the Drain flats out beyond Kesey vaults over an erosion fence at the
   bottom of the embankment

   Ri-i-i-i-i-ip

   a picket catches his pants in the crotch rips out the in-seams of both
   pants legs most neatly flapping on his legs like Low Rent cowboy chaps
   running and flapping through the Visitacion flats poor petered-out
   suckmuck marginal housing development last blasted edge of land you can
   build houses on before they just sink into the ooze and the compost poor
   Visitacion Drain kids playing ball in the last street before the ooze runs
   flapping through their ballgame stare at him

   And at the ghost on my heels?

   like the whole world turns into an endless kids' ballgame on the edge of
   the ooze thousands of Drain kids furling toward the horizon like an urchin
   funnel

   And that Alumicron blur behind me?

   shiny black shoes tusking up behind him stops stock still in the
   Visitacion Drain and

   Gotcha!

   in the cops and robbers game.

                                    chapter

                                     XXVII

                                 The Graduation

   THEY HAVE KESEY ON THREE FELONIES: THE ORIGINAL Conviction in San Mateo
   County for possession of marijuana, which he never served time on; the
   arrest for possession in San Francisco, after which he fled to Mexico; and
   a Federal charge of unlawful flight to avoid prosecution. A felon and a
   fugitive ... who; yes; was going to rub the FBI's nose in it for good
   measure ... and all about dope, at that... and throw away the key ... For
   three days they shuttle Kesey back and forth between County and Federal
   courthouses and jails in Redwood City and San Francisco. It will take a
   miracle to even get him out on bail, an inspiration, a vision ::::: ummm,
   a vision ::::: we can work it out ::::: Kesey's lawyers, Pat Hallinan,
   Brian Rohan and Paul Robertson, have a vision. The next morning they're in
   the courtroom in Redwood City at a bail hearing. The new style of
   Courtroom Modern, this courtroom, all great lineless slabs of blonde wood,
   and lowslung like ... the friendly banks of the suburbs. All very sunny
   under the fluorescent tubes. Kesey sits at the defense table wearing a
   blue workshirt. Robertson is on his feet telling the judge about a certain
   vision Mr. Kesey has had, of "beyond acid," an inspiration, a miracle, a
   light he has seen, although never mind the details of the beach in
   Manzanillo, not... those lights... In any case ... Mr. Kesey has a very
   public-spirited plan ... He has returned voluntarily from exile in his
   safe harbor, to risk certain arrest and imprisonment, in order to call a
   mass meeting of all LSD takers, past, present and potential, for the
   purpose of telling them to move beyond this pestilent habit of taking LSD
   .. . Robertson's talking a streak. It's a grand speech. Kesey is sitting
   up straight at the table staring blue bolts at the judge. But Robertson's
   words are like a fog. Kesey disappears in the soup, he reappears in a
   mist, undergoing metamorphosis before your very eyes. He's found religion,
   contrition, redemption, the error of his ways, and now he's going to tell
   The Youth his sad lesson ... Faye and the kids are in the audience. Also
   many of their old Perry Lane friends, Jim and Dorothea Fadiman, Ed
   McClanahan, Jim Woltman, and some others ... Several will stake their
   homes as bail security, $35,000 worth ... Repentance and redemption are
   sailing around the courtroom like cherubim. All us reporters are
   scribbling away ... Now Kesey is standing up facing the judge with his
   arms folded and the judge is giving him a lecture ... He may be a great
   literary lion and a romantic figure to some misguided youth but to this
   court he is a childish ass, an egotist who never grew up, a ... The judge
   is pouring it on, pouring it down his throat like cod-liver oil, but it's
   obvious it's just a buildup to saying he's going to grant bail anyway
   under the circumstances... Nevertheless Kesey is burning ... You can see
   him setting his jaw and getting ready to move his lips... God knows
   Hallinan and Robertson can see it. They're crouched beside him like
   bandits. The first peep out of him they're going to grab him around the
   throat... Keep your mouth shut, damn it. Don't blow it now. It's only
   cod-liver oil... But the judge has finished and it's over. He's out on
   bail in San Mateo County.

   The whole dam breaks after that. The FBI drops the Federal charge of
   unlawful flight to avoid prosecution. All of a sudden they don't seem very
   interested in the case, despite the salt in J. Edgar Hoover's wounds and
   the rest of it. Then back in San Francisco, and Kesey is standing in front
   of the judge in a faded sport shirt, work pants and boots. The judge has a
   terrific speech ready, saying this case has been blown up out of
   proportions in the press and it is only a common dope case as far as he is
   concerned, and Kesey is no dragon, just an ordinary jackass ... and Kesey
   is starting to say something and Hallinan and Rohan are crouched for the
   garrote, but again it's over and Kesey is out on bail in San Francisco,
   too. It's unbelievable. He's out after only five days.

   In the San Francisco jail

   Before he got out on bail

   Kesey met a kid with magic fingernails.

   "Take a lick," said the kid

   And everybody did.

   They all licked his nails and blew their lids.

   Twenty-seven psyches

   Going off like Nike

   Missiles through the lye-scoured

   Concrete skyways of the San Francisco jail.

   The kid had LSD on his magic fingernails.

   Now-

   Kesey told this story

   To the local news reporters

   Who pressed around him in the courtroom,

   After the hearing on his bail,

   Just to prove how hopeless

   Was the drive to stamp out dope

   With things like cops and jails.

   Try and stop a kid with magic fingernails !

   The headlines said

   LSD ORGY IN THE SAN FRANCISCO Jail!

   Ah...

   Certain local heads cried Judas.

   Finked on a stash, this Judas!

   While he himself so shrewdly

   Copped out of jail, on bail.

   A finking fingernail stash betrayal!

   If the truth be known-

   These good hearts flapped in fibrillation.

   They feared the rogue vibrations

   From the freaking Acid Graduation

   Kesey and the Pranksters planned;

   Their freaking Day-Glo last round-up in Winterland.

   Like, I mean,

   You know,

   Can't you see it coming:

   Ten thousand children of the flowers and grass and acid, speed

   and poppers, yellow jackets, amyl nitrate,

   Ten thousand heads, freaks, beats, hippy-dippies, teeny-boppers

   descending from the crest of Haight Street

   Tinkling, temple bells, rattling, donkey beads, reeking, grass,

   shuffling, elf boots, swarming prostrate

   Before the returning Prophet in the bowels of Winterland.

   All of psychedelphia moaning to the polyphonic droning of the

   Merry Prankster band!

   It's too easy for this headline-blazing superhero

   This amazing Cagliostro Elmer Gantry Day-Glo Nero-

   ON THE TOP FLOOR OF THE RUSSIAN EMBASSY, IN AN Extremely crummy brown room
   ... It looks inflammable, or spontaneous-combustible, the next cough,
   maybe, and it's all up in here. Jack the Fluke sits up in bed, namely, a
   mattress on the floor, with his back against the wall. .. wearing nothing
   except his cabbie's cap and the grizzle on his face and the grizzle on his
   Camembert chest... a brown blanket pulled up to his waist... Take a look
   at that! if you want to know about Kesey. A large message tacked up on the
   wall on a sheet of drawing paper:

   Dear Ken,

   The boys in the

   tank say hello.

   They want to know

   about their money. should

   they ask you or the

   Judge or who?

   Sandra, the girl from Bucks County, sits in a clump at the foot of the
   mattress. She is a very pale, tender little teenage clump. A single
   morsel, gone at one gulp, sitting under the room's one article of
   furniture, a bridge lamp, no longer goofing off the radio, just sitting in
   a teenage clump and listening to Jack tell me about the letter:

   "Oh man, there were a lot of good heads hassled and busted after Kesey
   told about that."

   "You mean the cops-"

   "The very ones. It was a bad scene. Like there's a lot of cats up here who
   are not enchanted with Ken Kesey. They sent him this letter."

   Well, obviously they haven't, because there it is, up on the wall. But the
   thought is there ...

   Creaks on the inflammable stairs, and into the room sidles a dark little
   guy in a T-shirt and jeans carrying a round plastic box of cheese spread
   and a knife in a scabbard-

   "Jack!" he says in this weird whisper

   -one of those long knives with a lot of fancy mother-of-pearl on the
   handle that you see in a Chinatown souvenir shop.

   "It was a bad scene," Jack the Fluke tells me. He ignores the guy-

   "Jack ... look at this," says the kid.

   "That's nice, Frenchy," says Jack.

   "Jack ... it's beautiful, " says Frenchy.

   "Like there's a lot of cats up here," Jack says to me again-

   "It's beautiful," says Frenchy. "Jack-you know where there's any
   morphine?"

   "No," says Jack, then resumes: "Like there's a lot of cats up here-"

   "It's a beautiful thing," says Frenchy.

   "-who are not enchanted with Ken Kesey and they sent him this letter."

   "Jack-"

   And Frenchy hunkers down on the floor and opens the cheese spread and
   pulls the knife out of the scabbard and sinks the blade into it. Quite a
   blade! a foot long and engraved with Chinese demons. He wipes gobs of
   cheese spread onto his tongue with the blade. Sandra sits silent in a
   clump, grooving on the full life. Jack raps on about perfidy in high
   places . . .

   I don't know what the reference to money is-"they want to know about their
   money." But the gist of it is clear enough. Kesey has sold out to keep
   from getting a five-year sentence or worse. Next he'll nail it down by
   calling all the kids to Winterland and telling them to stop taking LSD ...
   Freaking copout ...

   It's quite a mess for Kesey, of course. If he had lectured back at the
   judges like a Superhero, that would have been the end of everything,
   probably, with him salted away for many years. On the other hand, if he
   just stares back Orientally as the current fantasy of "beyond acid" is put
   forth, he looks like a cop-out in Haight-Ashbury ...

   All those good-loving heads... they've been having quite a time for
   themselves... a summer of euphoria, the millennium, in fact, LSD and
   hundreds of beautiful people already on the scene, and no more little
   games. They would just spread out like a wave over the world and end all
   the bull-shit, drown it in love and awareness, and nothing could stop
   them. I'll have to hand it to the heads. They really want to end the
   little games. Their hearts are pure. I never found more than one or two
   cynics or hustlers among them. But now that the moment is at hand,
   everyone is wondering ... Hmmmmmmm ... who is going to lead the way and
   hold the light? Then just one little game starts, known as politics...
   Hmmmmm ... As I say, their hearts are pure! Nevertheless, Chet Helms and
   the Family Dog have their thing, Bill Graham has his thing, the Grateful
   Dead have theirs, the Diggers have theirs, the Calliope Company have
   theirs, Bowen has his, even Gary Goldhill... It's a little like the
   socialist movement in New York after World War I-the Revolution is
   imminent, as all know and agree, and yet, Christ, everybody and his
   brother has a manifesto, the Lovestonites, the Dubinsky Socialists, the
   CPUSA (Bolshevik), the Wobblies, everybody has his own typewriters and
   mimeograph machines and they're all cranking away like mad and fuming over
   each other's mistranslations of the Message . . . Not that the heads in
   Haight-Ashbury are wrangling with each other yet, but what do they do
   about Kesey? Just sit back and let him and the Pranksters do their thing?
   Let them try to turn a lot of impressionable kids off LSD, the way the
   newspapers say he intends? Or let him suddenly make a big power play at
   Winterland and take over the whole movement? Politics, in a word ...

   And the Pranksters ... by and by ... I find them in the Calliope garage on
   Harriet Street, the old garage, the ex-pie factory in the bottom of the
   old hotel. I kept peeking around in the crazy gloom of the place, amid all
   the scabid wood and sour corners and ratty blankets and scaffoldings and
   beat-up theater seats and the luminous bus hulking in its own grease and
   the rotting mattresses where people stretched out and slept and the Shell
   station up the corner where everyone copped urinations, and I couldn't
   figure out what they had to be so exultant about. It beat me. As I look
   back on it, they were all trying to tell me ... Hassler with his discourse
   on the world full of games and futile oppositioning and how the Pranksters
   meant to show the world how to live ... with his toothbrush case
   shimmering ... He was a kind man! He was trying to give me the whole
   picture at once. It wasn't about cops and robbers in Mexico, it was
   about...

   Pranksters arriving from far and wide . . . The old Schism forgotten ...
   Paul Foster back from India, looking emaciated, his mustache and mutton
   chops gone, his head shaved, but with the great God Rotor roaring and
   digging away . . . Page telling me about huaraches... Mountain Girl, Doris
   Delay, The Hermit, Freewheeling Frank the Hell's Angel, Cassady flipping
   his sledgehammer, Babbs, Gretch, George Walker ... Zonker coming in with
   an Arab headdress as Torrence of Arabia ... Finally Kesey pulling in, Faye
   and the kids coming out... The Flag People, the bus glowing, the mystic
   fog rising ...

   IN THE STUDIO OF JOHN BARTHOLOMEW TUCKER'S  TELEVISION show, station KPIX,
   on Van Ness Avenue, I'm sitting in the studio audience up in the gloom
   behind the black backsides of the spotlights, the cameras, the dollies,
   the coils of wire ... Well, this is going to be fun-

                               The Danger of LSD

   -coming on in big letters on the screen of the monitor sets in the studio,
   with a drawing of three sugar cubes under it... the symbol of LSD, of
   course, like four X's XXXX, for whiskey,... and the voice-over saying

   "... and author Ken Kesey ..."

   Out in the clearing, beyond the jungle of light stands and wires and the
   rest of it, in a big pool of light, there's Kesey in his buckskin shirt
   and red Guadalajara boots sitting in one of those milky-white
   fiberglass-coated Saarinen swivel chairs that TV interview shows go for
   ... and Tucker, whose show it is, looking California Ivy League... and his
   other guest, Frankie Randall, looking sort of Las Vegas Yachtsman, as if
   any moment he is going to tell a long story about something very
   frustrating that happened to his El Dorado convertible in a parking lot in
   L.A. You can see this show has balance, as they say ... It fills up your
   head like a daydream ... brain candy ... a little talk with Randall about
   the Persian Room and dining at Sardi's and lying on the sands at
   Malibu-"Well, where do you go from here, Frankie!" "Well, I'll be at Lake
   Tahoe next week, John!"-and then, gravely, he'll bring on the elder
   statesman of psychedelphia, talking about the dangers of LSD and telling
   the kids to turn off, as if Kesey were an ex-Communist, reformed and
   returned from the class wars, with a few sizzling stories and then a
   moral. Just the ticket! a whiff of the dope dens and then a cold shower.

   "Well, tell me, Ken, could you give some idea of what an LSD trip is
   like?"

   "Yeah, it blows you out of your gourd."

   Tucker stares at him-

   "Well-now, you're-going to tell all the people not to take it any more, is
   that correct?"

   "I'm going to tell them to move on to the next step."

   "The next step?"

   "It's time to move on to the next step in the psychedelic revolution. I
   don't know what this is going to be in any way I could just spell out, but
   I know we've reached a certain point but we're not moving any more, we're
   not creating any more, and that's why we've got to move on to the next
   step-"

   The next step?... it keeps going that way ... They can't figure out what
   in the name of Christ this big cowboy is saying... What about the danger,
   man, those sugar cubes we had up there... and down in front of me, amid
   the wires and lights, a technician and a production assistant are
   frantically scrawling away on a big cue board with a marking pencil and
   they thrust it close to Tucker and Kesey, just out of camera range-

             Don't forget about danger of LSD! Say about LSD being

                       DANGEROUS - ESPECIALLY FOR KIDS !

   -and Kesey just looks at them and gives them the biggest, most inscrutable
   upcountry smile, which on the screen looks as though he has suddenly gazed
   off toward an old buddy who is saying, What a shuck, Kee-zee ...

   Later in the day, rolling across the TV screens of San Francisco again,
   Kesey and the Pranksters and the bus pull up to Winterland to look it over
   for the Acid Test Graduation ... TV microphones ... Kesey in Flag People
   coveralls and a ten-gallon straw hat. ..

   "Ken! Ken!" A TV announcer heaves into position. "Ken, could you tell us
   something about the message you're going to have for the kids at this Acid
   Test Graduation?"

   Kesey says, "I'm going to tell them, 'Never trust a-' "

   Braaaaaaaaaaang A huge glob of feedback screels into the microphone-

   "Could you repeat that, Ken?"

   "Braaaaaaaaaaang," says Kesey.

   "Ha-ha. No, what you were saying."

   "Never trust a Prankster," says Kesey. The scene breaks up in a covey of
   Flag People bobbing off the bus...

   Never trust a Prankster!...  Shit! ... That shakes them up all over again
   in Haight-Ashbury, there's no getting around that. A whole new
   inflammation of paranoia. The lunger heads are slithering up and down the
   store fronts on Haight Street. They're hunkered down gabbling in the
   India-print living rooms. The whole thing takes a Stakhanovite left turn.
   Kesey is not a right deviationist but a left deviationist. He's not going
   to cop out by telling the kids to stop taking LSD, that's just the cover
   story. Instead he's going to pull a monster prank that will wreck the
   psychedelic movement once and for all... Well, the acid heads in
   Haight-Ashbury are like a tribe in one respect, anyway, I can see that.
   It's all jungle drums and gossip with them, they love it, they swim in it,
   like fish in a stream in a cave ... A terrific thought bubbles up in the
   universal brain ... The Acid Test Graduation is scheduled for Winterland
   on Monday, October 31, Halloween. The next night the California Democratic
   Party is holding a big rally in Winterland for Governor Brown, who is
   running against Ronald Reagan. Kesey and the Pranksters hold their
   Winterland blast on Halloween. Right? Far from being an "acid graduation,"
   it will be an Acid Test of unbelievable proportions. Electric Kool-Aid
   will rain in the air like a typhoon, swizzle up every vein, 6,000 heads
   smashed out of their nuts, ricocheting off the walls like electric golf
   balls... The sky falls... But that's not all. They won't stop there! these
   maniacs... The Pranksters will smear all the doors, railings, walls,
   chairs, the heating system, the water fountains, with DMSO ... laced with
   LSD ... Dig? ... DMSO is close to being an old alchemical ideal, the
   universal solvent. Put a drop of DMSO on your fingertip and thirty seconds
   later you can taste it in your mouth. It goes right through your skin and
   through your system that fast. DMSO with LSD ... What a vision! The
   following night the entire Democratic Party of California will get turned
   on, zonked out of their apples. Eight thousand emphysematous fatbacked
   Senators, Assemblymen, National Committeemen, National Committeewomen,
   Congressmen, the Governor himself, wailing like banshees, flopping around
   and gurgling and spitting and frying like a pile of insane pancakes,
   whereupon the Deaf Policemen descend on the whole psychedelic movement
   with knouts flailing ...

   Christ! what a stew... Now the heads don't know whether Kesey is selling
   them out or shoving a big Roman candle up the universal arse. They're
   fascinated. They come around the Warehouse and peep into the gloom. Their
   eyes shine at the doorway with a hepatic fever . .. They come into the
   Warehouse, they stare at the bus, they stare at Kesey, Mountain Girl,
   Cassady, Babbs... A whole platoon of them comes in, beads rattling,
   teetering around like gauchos, staring at the bus and going "Wowwwww!
   Wowwwwwww!" and smiling at each other, like, it's so groooovy, and
   suddenly all the Pranksters fall silent. "Cops," says Mountain Girl in
   total disgust. "How do you know?" "Look at their shoes." They have on
   lace-up boots like telephone linesmen. "You could never git heads to wear
   heavy shoes like that," she says. Only a momentary downer, however. The
   fact is, the Pranksters are sailing. They've got the whole town into their
   movie by now, cops and all. Kesey is all over TV, radio, and newspapers.
   He's a celebrity, the perfect celebrity, the Good-Bad Guy, reeking all the
   secret Zea-lot delights of sin but promising to do good. They were all
   over town on the bus, befuddling the communal brain ... Even into
   Fillmore, the big Negro section, with the loudspeakers playing rock 'n'
   roll and American flags flying and a big sign on the bus reading

                                 Colored Power

   moving through the ghetto in a blur of Day-Glo swirls. The spades in
   Fillmore didn't know what the hell to make of that. Were these white
   freaks serious, only they got the term wrong? Or was it a
   shuuuuuuuuuuuck-by the time they figured it out, the bus was long gone,
   wailing off somewhere else. Then the big sign

                              Acid Test Graduation

   went up on the bus, and the bus went wheeling through Haight-Ashbury and
   downtown San Francisco and North Beach and Berkeley advertising the
   world's biggest convocation of all the heads. Pranksters flapping from
   every portal. George Walker up on top on the drums, Page on the electric
   guitar. Mountain Girl hanging out the back of the bus exploding sunballs
   and screaming at the nonplused multitudes on the subject of the race for
   governor and Kesey's various busts

   "Kesey for Governor!"

   "A man of convictions!"

   "He stands on his record!"

   "The idiot's choice!"

   "A joint in every stash!"

   "No hope without dope!"

   They were immune again. The whole freaking town was into the movie. And
   after ...

   . . . Winterland; yes . . . the hardest part of the whole fantasy, as
   usual, has been finding the right place. Winterland is perfect, the
   biggest indoor arena in the city limits, and a tight ship, used for ice
   shows and so on. The Winterland management didn't want to deal directly
   with Kesey and the Pranksters. Maniacs! jailbirds ... That was where Bill
   Graham came in. There was no love lost between Graham and Kesey, but
   Graham agrees to serve as producer, impresario, the sane hand on the
   controls, and sign the contract. Graham's job is to stay up on top of the
   new wave. But it's an aesthetic and moral thing with him, too. He's a
   believer, underneath it all... Hmmmm ... There's Kesey ... Well... Anyway,
   Hallinan and Rohan draw up a contract between Graham and Intrepid Trips,
   Inc. It's signed and a deposit is down, all legal and locked up.

   Then there's the Grateful Dead. Kesey wants them for the Acid Test
   Graduation. They're essential, he says. But the Dead have a contract to
   play at an annual Halloween costume ball at California Hall. Ironically,
   the Pranksters' benefactors, the Calliope Company, were sponsoring it, and
   they had an impresario named Bob McKendrick running it. Kesey and
   McKendrick and a couple of the Calliope Company, Paul Hawken, Michael
   Laton and Bill Tara, are up in an apartment on the top floors of a rickety
   building on Pine Street, all wood slats and bay windows. There are no
   furnishings, just a mattress in the living room. The sun makes a huge
   glare in here. Kesey sits on the mattress and everybody else is hunkered
   down on the floor. Except Mc-Kendrick. He is standing up in the middle of
   the floor like someone dancing on a hot plate. He has on tight black
   pants, black shark toe slip-on shoes, a soft black sweater and open-neck
   shirt.. . dressed Main Stem hipster, in short. He's broken up in the
   glare, twenty-seven parts, all fidgeting.

   "Look, Ken," he's saying, "you're a leader, a prophet, you might say, and
   you have an important message, and I dig that, you know? I respect that. .
   . But I have to think of this in other terms. I'm responsible to a lot of
   people, and there's a lot of money involved."

   Twenty-seven parts!-all moving, doesn't anyone see that this is a main
   chance, this dance at California Hall, in the impresario game. Kesey just
   sits there and keeps working on him like how long is it before he will see
   how it's going to be-Hell, man! join forces with the Pranksters. Move your
   scene to Winterland, co-sponsor it. If he doesn't, everybody on ... The
   Scene will go to Winterland anyway, and he and his whole California Hall
   scene will be wiped out anyway. McKendrick is beside himself. His black
   pants shimmy in the glare. He smells disaster either way. Put me back
   together again! Everyone stares. It's all glare and myopia in here! He
   comes to a stop. He agrees. He pulls out of California Hall, freeing the
   Dead, thrash, crumble-

   -bits and freaking pieces, grumbling. The heads start grumbling about
   Kesey's power play. Kesey's power play. The Grateful Dead ... They've been
   doing all right! Since the Acid Tests they have become a thing, the
   pioneers of the new sound, acid rock, with the record companies beginning
   to sniff around :::: hmm-mmm :::: the very next thing? Freak that. All and
   everyone in one bag now, Winterland.

   Friday night and the Pranksters decide to drop in on the Fillmore. Like,
   well, it's Friday night. Kesey, Cassady, Babbs, Page, about a dozen of
   them, all in the Flag People coveralls, Cassady flipping his sledgehammer.
   The scene around the Fillmore is a freak show for sure. The dance hall is
   set down right in the middle of the Negro slums, at Fillmore and Geary,
   and it's Friday night with a lot of young spades with Stingy-Brim hats on
   out on the street having the usual Friday night on the streets and old
   Negro women doing the groceries for the weekend, liquor stores,
   drugstores, cars inching along, black faces all over the streets. Right in
   the middle of them, the white freaks. Kids in psychedelic dress burbling
   and gaggling up to the Fillmore-Colored Power! the kids have that, all
   right. Kesey and the Pranksters walk up the stairs to the dance hall,
   which is on the second floor. Kesey talks to the ticket seller and the
   ticket taker. There's a big conference. The ticket taker goes upstairs. He
   comes back ... like, very bad vibrations... They can't come in unless they
   buy tickets. .. Graham ... bad vibrations, a freaking insult, in fact. The
   Pranksters go back out on the street to mull that one over. There's a
   Cyclone fence at the rear entrance of the Fillmore with a freaked-out
   chomping police dog behind it... Graham ... Cassady goes off... A few
   minutes later he's back.

   "I ran into Bill Graham," he says. "He was out on the street checking tire
   treads to see if they'd picked up any nickels. I says, 'Bill...' and he
   says, 'Look, Neal, we're in two different worlds. You're a hippie and I'm
   a square. Square.' He did it like this"-and Cassady makes a square in the
   air with his forefingers to show how he did it-" 'You're a hippie and I'm
   a square.' Says, 'I got off the subway in 1955, but you're still on it.
   We're in two different worlds. You're a hippie and I'm a square.' I'm
   telling you, Chief," he says to Kesey, "I had some very negative feelings.
   I remembered what you said about negative feelings, but I had some very
   negative feelings." Kesey laughs, but-

   All day Saturday the Pranksters are working like mad. They're hassling up
   all sorts of equipment, mikes, spots, amplifiers, speakers, strobes, even
   an electronic music machine, all the stuff they had at the Acid Tests and
   more. They can't get into Winterland until Sunday to start rigging it up
   because there's some show in there Saturday night. Anyway, they're working
   en charrette Saturday and into Saturday night... At five o'clock in the
   morning, Sunday, it hits the fan. Kesey's lawyer, Rohan, gets wakened up
   at 5 a.m., at home ... Graham is on the phone, very excited, explaining a
   million things a mile a minute.

   They are having quite a little session up in Graham's office at the
   Fillmore. All night it's been going on. Graham has been wrestling with
   many negative feelings. He knows that term, too. By heart-also Chet Helms
   knows it, and the Grateful Dead, and the Quicksilver Messenger Service,
   and more and more ::::: three fourths of The Scene is here, says Graham,
   the're all over the place, hanging on the walls... Everyone is in a
   terrific sweat. Are we actually going to let Kesey do this thing? pull off
   this debacle? Go :::: beyond acid, whatever that may be, which, whatever
   it is, is no good for anyone here .. . They've hauled out all the
   versions, the cop-out, the power play, the way Kesey twisted McKendrick's
   arm, the DMSO ... the DMSO! . .. That's it! Christ, Bill, can't you see
   ... They're putting pressure on Graham to pull out of the deal. . .
   They've got me by each limb, wild tow trucks heading to the four points of
   the compass... The more they talk, the more urgent it is to do something,
   else, Christ, why have we been here all night... Hope incubates in the
   warm loam of every armpit... Helms has it figured out. Kesey's mentality
   is military. He thinks in terms of power differentials. He's playing the
   desert fox-lure the enemy into your own battleground by doing a turn-face
   claiming you came back to stop kids from taking acid, and when you have
   thousands of these straight people together, turn them on to acid. Kesey's
   playing the tactical deceit and fac,ade game-and so on ... And the Dead
   ... Why should we blow our hard-earned scenes for Kesey? As Ralph Gleason
   the columnist says. .. Kesey's going to blow the whole new San Francisco
   scene for us. And Graham ... I ran into Cassady on the street. He's waving
   this sledgehammer at me like he's going to knock my head off if I don't
   play ball... Many negative feelings. Kesey's an Elmer Gantry, says Graham
   ... That's it! Elmer Gantry, the evangelical demagogue . . . Freaking
   debacle either way ... If he blows it, he blows it for us all. If he
   succeeds, he takes over the whole psychedelic movement and leads it into
   the Elmer Gantry thing, Father Divine, Daddy Grace, Cagliostro, charlatan
   limbo, sledgehammer theocracy, a phosphorescent fascist fandango, King
   Herod spavining the Flower Children, O Fuck & Corruption, G-narl, G-nash,
   Elmer Gantry Cagliostro Day-Glo Nero .. . Stop Kesey ...

   In short, Graham is pulling out of the deal and there will be no Acid Test
   Graduation at Winterland.

   LATE IN THE AFTERNOON IN THE WAREHOUSE - CHRIST, It's dismal in here! The
   place is always a shambles, of course, but now the funk of the day's
   debacle is settling in like a sludge. The vermin are regaining the upper
   hand ... The lice! The pigeon fleas! The roaches! rats! scabies! impetigo!
   clap! piles! herpes! all rising up out of the debris like boils . . .
   Faye, Mountain Girl, Babbs, Gretch, Black Maria, Page, Doris Delay,
   Stewart Brand, Lois, the Hermit, Roy Seburn, Gut the ex-Hell's Angel,
   Kesey's brother Chuck, Zonker-they're all rumbling around in the gloom,
   but they're not Flag People any more, the costumes are off like the war is
   over ... They're gathering around in a circle in folding chairs and old
   theater seats on one side of the bus. .. Acid Test Graduation... The sign
   is still stretched across the whole side of the bus ... Well, shit.. .
   Kesey, in his buckskin shirt again, comes around in the midst of them
   carrying a huge easy chair-stuffed with tiny wings!-over his head-and sets
   it down with the back to the bus and sits down in it-a molting chair-and
   the Prankster circle rings out from him. Kesey stares at a spiral notebook
   he has and then starts talking in a voice so soft I can hardly hear him at
   first... about what has just happened ... about Danny Rifkin and some
   others who came by to tell him they were pulling out of the Winterland
   fantasy.

   "It didn't take long to know they wouldn't change their minds," he says.
   "They won't change because they have too much money involved ... As soon
   as they left, I lay down and I thought about it and then I knew we have
   everything we want right here . . ."

   Right here?

   ". . . in this warehouse, and this is where we're going to do it. We're
   going to have the Graduation here and it's going to be our scene. We have
   a certain number of people we want to get close to us, and they're going
   to be here and it's going to be better than anything we could have done at
   Winterland ..."

   Whistling

   ".. . Here we're on our own grounds, and we can do what we want, for our
   own scene, and we don't have to do any more politicking or compromising.
   We'll do it our own way and we'll be the Bay Area's Superheroes ..."

   Last hole in the sapling sky

   "... One reason it didn't come off was that it was too big and too hot and
   they all got frightened. They all want to be eagles, but they don't want
   to act like eagles, so we're going to have to do it ourselves. We tried to
   do it the other way, but they weren't interested ... So we're going to
   keep it down to those people who are going to make it as tight a scene as
   we can get. They are the kind of people who, if they've got anything to
   say, it will spread out from them, and they can say it straight, and it
   will spread out from them and there will be no stopping it. And that's the
   essential fantasy. We're moving it all in here, into the Rat Shack."

   Into the Rat Shack

   Then Kesey's voice picks up and he starts assigning tasks: Page in charge
   of setting up a stage and chairs. Roy Seburn to decorate the place with a
   lot of cloth hangings. Faye and Gretch to get food and drink. Hermit to
   seal up all the holes in the walls. Zonk to draw up and post the guest
   list...

   The few!

   The fantasy is to compile an invitation list and contact them all, far and
   wide, now, this afternoon and tonight, by telephone, messenger, whatever
   it takes, and everybody starts thinking of those people close in enough to

   The whole freaking adventure

   to invite to this last roundup .. . What a thought! ...

   Do you remember

   all the Pranksters who have wandered far and wide, like June the Goon,
   Marge the Barge, Sensuous X, Anonymous, Norman Hartweg-

   "Hire an ambulance to bring him from Ann Arbor!" Christ, all the
   memories... the Perry Lane people ... Sandy Lehmann-Haupt-

   Because, nevertheless, he was there when

   the pudding whipped up creamy--

   "Hugh Romney!"

   "Bonnie Jean!"

   And Paul Sawyer and Rachel Rightbred ... and all the wild screwy people
   who got on the bus on the golden track wherever and whither-

   "Mary Microgram!"

   "That little guy who wrote the pot poem!"-and they write that down-

   "That guy with the ears, that weirdo!" says Babbs-and they write that
   down-

   "That couple in Portland!"-and they write that down-

   "That pretty Indian boy on Haight Street!"-and they write that down-

   "The Mad Chemist!"

   Yeah ! Oh shit, do you remember

   "Big Nig!"

   Gimme the rent

   "Culley!"

   "Owsley!"

   Survival

   "That guy in jail!"

   "The Who Cares Girl!"

   Ra-a-a-a-ay

   "Ray!"

   "Pancho Pillow!"

   "J. Edgar Hoover!"-and they write that down-

   See the very hunted coons

   "Gaylord!"

   "Jim Fish!"

   "Agent Number One!"

   !Maricones!

   Cosmo!

   Cos-mo

   Oh shit what a flow from eons ago in La Honda across the length and the
   breadth and the sleek and the Rat and it all comes flooding and bubbling
   back like a crest if they can just sit up on it and ride and ride and ride
   and ride here in the gloom and beat back those little crab lice in
   frogmen's suits six little neoprene rubber armlets for each little crab
   louse leg creeping about camouflaged like tiny scars in the brain the
   focking debacle infestation, the morose thought clumped somewhere in every
   brain until out through the starveling self-shuck fiesta euphoria Page
   brings it out front and out loud in the scabid sinkhole of the Warehouse,
   the ancient Shellube voice of please-don't-shit-me:

   "It's great to be a part of the greatest jackoff in history."

   NEVERTHEFREAKINGLESS! THE NEXT NIGHT, HALLOWEEN, the magic long-awaited
   hour ... I can hardly believe it, the Pranksters have transformed the
   place. You have to hand it to them, they must have worked like Turks. It's
   still a pestilence among buildings, you understand, this Warehouse, but
   there's verve in the air, Rat splendor. The most splendid thing is a huge
   orange-and-white parachute, an enormous thing, just the silk, not the
   strings and all, hooked to the ceiling at the apex, and billowed out to
   the far corners of the ceiling like some majestic canopy out of a Louis XV
   lawn revel in the Orangerie at Versailles. It glistens ! Grand luxe! The
   very same parachute, it turns out, that Astronauts use on reentry for the
   splashdown ... Hm-mmmm ... Yes... Quite a sight! The Pranksters have
   turned into the Flag People again, in their American Flag coveralls.
   Mountain Girl sits at the Sixth Street side in Flag coveralls checking
   guests against the invitation list which is posted up on the door in Paul
   Foster God Rotor script. Mountain Girl opens the Can't Bust 'Em coveralls
   and suckles Sunshine as the few, the faithful.. . the many! . . . come
   flapping by . . . Their faces are painted in Art Nouveau swirls, their
   Napoleon hats are painted, masks painted, hair dyed weird, embroidered
   Chinese pajamas, dresses made out of American flags, Flash Gordon
   diaphanous polyethylene, supermarket Saran Wrap, India-print coverlets
   shawls Cossack coats sleeveless fur coats piping frogging Bourbon hash
   embroidery serapes sarongs saris headbands bows batons vests frock coats
   clerical magisterial scholar's robes stripes strips flaps thongs Hookah
   boots harem boots Mexicali boots Durango boots elf boots Knight boots Mod
   boots Day-Glo Wellingtons Flagellation boots beads medallions amulets
   totems polished bones pigeon skulls bat skeletons frog thoraxes dog femurs
   lemur tibia kneecap of a coyote ... A hell of a circus, in short, a whole
   carnival banner, a panopticon. Hell's Angels pulling in, in their colors,
   the death's-head jackets, full dress, beards combed and trimmed, Terry the
   Tramp, Pete the Drag Racer, Ralph of Oakland, plus their girls...
   miniskirts and raspberry stockings. .. Chocolate George ... Chaos!
   Shitfire! Chocolate George doesn't see his name on the list and his girl
   keeps saying, "What's the matter, George, can't we get in?" until Mountain
   Girl gives a bullshit laugh and waves them in. A kid about ten pops out of
   the door onto Sixth Street and yells, "Who's smoking grass around
   here?"-in the most demanding voice you ever heard ... aggressive little
   devil. There's even a nursery set up inside the door and they keep making
   the Hermit stay the hell out of there. Kesey is off to one side in a Flag
   People coverall, looking around, not saying much, listening to a big Angel
   from Oakland who has on a polka-dot shirt and a polka-dot tie under his
   Angels' jacket-"I wore a shirt and tie, Ken, on account of it's
   Halloween"-rock 'n' roll playing over the loudspeakers, which are all over
   the place, on the sides, on the ceiling, right up in the summit of the
   parachute canopy even ... microphones, cameras, TV cameras... Yes ... The
   Few and the Faithful!-all the same, the word of the hoopla in the scabid
   old Warehouse is around town like a chic piece of information.
   Irresistible, of course ... Three TV stations have cameramen there, four
   radio stations with microphones and tape machines. Herbert Gold the
   novelist with an aftershave smile on. Ingrid Bergman's daughter, Pia
   Lindstrom ... Oh, sweet adrenal edge! This is where it's at! what-could
   this be... the new wave?... Where? in comes the Women's Wear Daily
   correspondent in San Francisco, Albert Morch, a brassy little character
   with a Rolleiflex around his neck ... Caterine Milinaire of Vogue with a
   miniature camera in a chain-mail evening purse, standing amid Angels,
   heads, and the Probation Generation like a Bulfinch princess . . . Larry
   Dietz the magazine writer from Los Angeles... And me ... Kesey looking
   around and saying nothing and . .. wondering . .. Hmmmmm ... The Few and
   the Faithful and the whole hulking world. It's a regular beano, all right.
   But, Mother! These costumes aren't for a Halloween party but for the
   liberation of dead souls... churchly vestiture, in truth ...

   Are we blind? ... Oblation ... Consecration ... Communion ... Well... The
   Anonymous Artists of America climbing up onto the stage ... They're like
   freaking faeries out of A Midsummer Night's Dream, dueling shirts and long
   gowns of phosphorescent pastels like the world never saw before, Day-Glo
   death masks beaming out in front of the instruments. The music suddenly
   submerges the room from a million speakers... a soprano tornado of it...
   all-electric, plus the Buchla electronic music machine screaming like a
   logical lunatic ...

   Out into the middle, under the great parachute canopy and the spotlights,
   sailing across the mungery carpet. . . Doris Delay of the Pranksters in
   Flag People coveralls and Terry the Tramp of Hell's Angels in an Ozark
   razorback stovepipe hat dark glasses Angel beard, a huge brown-and-black
   striped sweater like a raccoon, the Angels' sleeveless jacket and the
   death's head, blue jeans, motorcycle boots ... Christ, here's a coming-out
   party for you, Doris Delay and Terry the Tramp . .. stomping and flailing
   about in a regular hoedown ... but formal in a wacky way. They dance for
   about a minute and then the others rush out, a storm of them, couples in
   acid-head fancy dress, dancing to the rock 'n' roll, only they're dancing
   clean out of their gourds, they leap, they flail their arms up in the air,
   they throw their heads back, they gyrate and levitate ... they're in a
   state ... they're ecstatic ... Gary Goldhill looks on from the side. He
   has on a huge lake-red Chinese pajama top with a gold dragon embroidered
   on it. He's spooked about the Warehouse .. . Musty! . .. Insane! ...
   Friends or spirits? Well-Earth can be Heaven & Hell and he takes the
   plunge ... and reaches into his pants pocket and swallows a potion . ..

   Already a few enraptured grins breaking out in the crowd ... Rapt
   wet-lipped bliss... They glisten, their eyes are wide open like plastic
   nodules. The Telepathic Kid is so high, grinning so wet and glistening, he
   looks like one great psychic orgasm getting ready to unfold exfoliate into
   ... a calla lily ... and a blond kid with a white Nehru coat on and a big
   silver pendant hanging down over his chest kneeling before the rock 'n'
   roll band with his hands brought up like in prayer and a grin of such pure
   acid bliss on his face that his teeth sizzle ... a pot full of boiling
   pearls ... The Pranksters; Babbs and Gretch and Page and others, take to
   the bandstand, all electrified, and they start beaming out the most weird
   loud Chinese science-fiction music and cranking up the Buchla electronic
   music machine until it maneuvers itself into the most incalculable sonic
   corner, the last turn in the soldered circuit maze, and lets out a pure
   topologically measured scream. Ultima-time, with heavy-duty wiring, the
   works. Kesey stands off to one side still, in the shadows, at... Control
   Central, only now he has the Flag People coveralls off and is bare
   chested, wearing only white leotards, a white satin cape tied at the neck,
   and a red, white, and blue sash running diagonally across his chest. It's
   ... Captain America! The Flash! Captain Marvel! the Superhero, in a word
   ...

   At the height of the frenzy suddenly the lights go out, the sound goes
   out, all replaced by a single spotlight hitting the center of the floor.
   Kesey's brother Chuck is up in the rafters working the lights. You can
   hear Babbs's and Hassler's voices over microphones in the dark, rapping
   back and forth in a shuck manner: "Do you think they'd clear out of the
   center if we asked them, Hassler?" ... "Sure, they're gonna clear out the
   center faster than you can say clear out the center" ... But everyone just
   mills around, caught in the blackout. Babbs says: "If they don't clear out
   the center, then they're a bunch of assholes" ... Well, let's try the
   direct approach! They clear out of the ellipse where the spot beams down,
   and Kesey comes in out of the darkness. He's taken the cape and the sash
   off, however. Too freaking much, I guess. He's just wearing the white
   ballet tights and his wrestler's build. A pair of jockey shorts show
   faintly under the leotards-just the right touch ... here in the Rat Shack
   ... He has a hand microphone up to his mouth.... Kesey in the leotards
   with the pool of light in front of him and the heads all packed in around
   the loop of light in the darkness.... It's good and theatrical ... in a
   weird weird way ... Some of the heads get the point immediately. Without a
   sound, they start tossing things into the pool of light, sugar cubes,
   capsules, cigarette papers, a couple of joints, beads, amulets, headbands,
   all the charms and totems of psychedelphia into the pool of light. It's
   ... an altar ... Kesey starts talking over the microphone in the upcountry
   drawl...

   "When we were down in Mexico, we learned a lot about waves. We spent six
   months down there learning about waves. Even in the dark you can feel the
   waves..."

   It's a wrench, that voice, what is it? up to now-a party, a frenzy. All of
   a sudden it's on a whole other level... of some sort... we can't figure it
   out. The TV crews are trying to edge up close and jockey for position. Is
   this where he tells the kids to turn off LSD? ... Which is what-we came
   for... Waves?

   "I believe that man joo-guilherme epifnio is changing ... in a radical basic way ... The waves
   are building, and every time they build, they're stronger. Our concept of
   reality is changing. It's been happening here in San Francisco ... I
   believe there's a whole new generation of kids. They walk different... I
   can hear it in the music ... It used to go ... life-death, life-death ...
   but now it's ... death-life . . . death-life

   The TV crewmen are trying to hand their microphones to heads near Kesey.
   They want them to hold them near him to pick up the words better. They
   implore the heads, they half order them in stage whispers. The heads are
   disgusted. They just stare at them. Kesey shoots a few whammies their way
   ... These bastards and their... positioning... they only want to use you
   for a little while ... They're punctures in the dirigible, flatulent
   murmurs in the heart, they're-the TV crews are pissed, too. Snotty
   dope-head kids! ... Coverage is a pain in the ass here in Edge City. Can't
   do with it, can't do without it-a grand hassle in the making-

   "... For a year we've been in the Garden of Eden. Acid opened the door to
   it. It was the Garden of Eden and Innocence and a ball. Acid opens that
   door and you enter and you stay awhile ..."

   At which precise point-mysteries of the synch! yes-four policemen great
   dark-blue figures come walking in through the door on the Sixth Street
   side. The word starts firing around the crowd avio in the dark: Cops! Cops! ...
   One last monster raid to finish off the debacle! There is a hell of a
   scurrying in the darkness, bodies hitting the walls of the garage, like
   gigantic fancy-dress rats looking for holes ... Get the hell out of here!
   ... It's the Probation Generation, of course, all the kids who are out on
   probation under firm admonition not to associate with known dope users...
   they're practically digging through the concrete floor ... The four
   policemen keep walking in at a slow gait, looking this way and that.
   Cassady is on a microphone way behind Kesey now, up on the stage, in fact,
   beginning to rap about the cops coming in: "Four custom-tailored
   constables, you understand, looking for pearl heads among the
   swineherds..."

   "The cops are here?" says Kesey. He sounds startled.

   "The constabulary cops ..."

   "They come in waves, too," says Kesey, "they're a pattern that repeats"
   ... Yah! ...

   By now the cops have just stopped on the edge of the crowd in the
   darkness, just looking around.

   "There's cops and there's policemen," Kesey says. "The cop says, 'Don't do
   that. That's forbidden and that's all there is to that.' The policeman
   says, 'You can do that, but if you go too far, you're going to hurt
   yourself The policeman is the double line in the middle of the road. I'm
   talking about inside of us."

   A spot suddenly comes on, hitting Cassady in a little cone of light. "It's
   like Ken once said," says Cassady. "If you ignore a cop for twenty years,
   then he's not there any more ..."

   "Haw!-Haw!-Haw!"-Hell's Angels in the corner-the four cops just survey the
   camp meeting, then start turning around to leave. Cassady keeps on
   rapping:

   "Yes! Violence, you understand .. . There's not going to be any violence
   here. If we wanted some violence we have some fellows here who could
   furnish it. .."

   "Haw!-Haw!-Yah!-Yagggggh!-A good cop is a dead cop!"

   "A good cop is a dead cop!"

   But the cops just walk on out, rocking at the same slow gait, brushing
   through a clump of Hell's Angels like they weren't there. The cops are
   gone, but they punctured the atmosphere again. Kesey tries to build it up,
   in the same soft tones, but it's tough going. He plunges in with the
   vision, the vision of Beyond

   Acid, how he saw the lines of light across the bay in Manzanillo, the line
   of grass . . .

   "... and I'd smoked some grass, some Acapulco Gold, as a matter of fact. .
   ."

   Cheers go up in the dark, Acapulco Gold! Oh shit we're esoteric heads and
   we know the creamiest of all the marijuana. But it's a freaking puncture.
   Kesey plunges through the whole vision: the line of acid, the circle
   demanding completion, the little lights across the bay ... It's
   metaphorical, allegorical, brains are getting messed up left and right...
   The rock 'n' roll, the frenzy, the TV cameras, the darkness, the cops, and
   now... this... It keeps ricocheting from level to level. Shit! what is
   Kesey... doing... Finally the line with the hook on it-completing the
   circle without going all the way. He's telling them the whole thing,
   but-what is . ..

   "We've been going through that door and staying awhile and then going back
   out through that same door. But until we start going that far . . . and
   then going beyond . . . we're not going to get anywhere, we're not going
   to experience anything new . .."

   They're uncomfortable, they're stuffing their shirts in and pulling them
   out, too many rips in the balloon, and brains messed up.. . and the
   freaking TV jackals stabbing microphones around like tape-recording the
   hanging of Lenny Bruce-

   "Let's find out where we are. Let's move it around. Let's dance on it."

   The lights come back on, the music starts back up, the color is back,
   everything starts spinning like a top again. Goldhill is zonked by now.
   The music flows through his neural ganglia like a flood of relief... Love!
   Bless, bless! bright lights! The Hell's Angels are stomping around again,
   everybody dancing. But that doesn't last long. Kesey is out in the middle
   of the crowd. People close in around him. The music stops. Kesey looks
   slightly glazed over but plunging on, like he is determined to seize the
   whole debacle by the shoulders and shake it into place. He has a chunk of
   ice. He kisses it, he puts a big chunk in his mouth, he breaks off a chunk
   and gives it to Cassady. Cassady kisses a chunk and then rubs it all over
   his bare chest. An ice thing ... The TV cameramen and radio reporters are
   trying to edge in. They're buffeted back. Everything is pitching and
   rolling. Kesey and Cassady are sitting on the floor communing over the
   ice. Pranksters and some other heads are getting into a circle on the
   floor with Kesey and Cassady ... the lotus position ... Gary Goldhill sits
   down with them. He's ready. The kid with the sizzling teeth sits down
   among them, zonked ... the lotus position ... His back is arched back
   stiff in the Nehru coat. He's rapt. The pot of pearls boils and boils.
   They all join hands and close their eyes-a communal circle ... They close
   their eyes tighter and tighter, waiting for... the energy. It's coming!
   It's coming! A high-pitched keening noise rises up from the circle ... Do
   you hear it! ... It's weird ... Half the people looking on are nonplused,
   they're embarrassed. What is this a Halloween party or a seance and the
   Holy Rollers? Christ... Albert Morch of Women's Wear Daily says to
   Caterine Millinaire: "Say! when! met you last night-I didn't know you were
   the Duke of Bedford's daughter!" ... Got religion! The Angels are
   restless. They're standing around the edge of the circle. "Hey! Start the
   music!" ... In the circle, Kesey, Cassady, and the rest-they're starting
   to rap back and forth. The kid with the boiling teeth hears the voice. His
   eyes are still tight shut. He grins and glistens. "A dead towhee," he
   says, "a rumpled road and a dead towhee." His voice is on the edge of
   delirium and tears ... or else any moment he is going to break into an
   insane cackling laugh... "A dead towhee and a rumpled road and lying in
   the dust, a mistake... a mistake, but it's not important... Making a
   mistake is not important... it's the context in which the mistake is made
   ... A rumpled road and a dead towhee and four gasoline stations, white and
   sterile, refueling tailfins in mid-air for fat men in sunglasses who do
   not see the rumpled road and the dead towhee ..."

   Goldhill sits rapt... Energy waves emanating from everywhere ... Like ...
   black spirits! ... Kesey & Cassady-what are they trying to do with his
   mind ... Got me, trapped me into the Big Wait-for what? an idea? a
   revelation? love? feeling? breakthrough-into what? or

   Put-on

   They're putting him on! Sucking him in! But-the idea we're waiting for-he
   can feel it, physically, it's surging through ... He looks deep down
   inside, to describe it.

   Presque vu!

   Mass daemonic hallucination it is! He looks around ... All pitches and
   rolls...

   A CIRCUS OR HELL

   The tortured and the damned are all around him, the dead-for-good souls
   ... He gets up radiating Chinese firecrackers from his dragon pajamas and
   heads for the Sixth Street door but... the Dead and the Damned! Faces!

   Hell's Angels

   Hell's Angels are packed into the corridor leading to the door ready for

   Massacre

   He turns back into the crowd, sinks into a time warp ... Like his life is
   an endless tape loop ... Black spirits keep bubbling up out of the most
   ancient pits of licorice detergent

   Trap

   That! Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare Hare Rama Hare
   Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare and as he chants he becomes... Krishna! ...
   Christ! ... God ... And he pops out of the time warp into the silver haze
   of... The Universal Mind ...

   "We almost had it," says Kesey, opening his eyes for the first time. "We
   would have had it. There's too much noise ..." But it's like the cloud has
   passed.

   People are milling around, starting to leave. They're befuddled and
   embarrassed. What the hell kind of party ... The Angels are beginning to
   leave, the TV crews, Herbert Gold has had enough ... Albert Morch ... It's
   getting toward three o'clock ... People stare at the stage, but there's no
   sign of music. Is it over? Are you on the bus? ... in the pudding?

   Kesey plunges on. The lights go out again. The wrench is total now. It's a
   whole other .. . thing ... Kesey moves to the other side of the floor and
   sits down. The spot hits him. The Pranksters start gathering from all over
   the garage: Mountain Girl, The Hermit, Babbs, Gretch, Doris Delay, Page,
   The Hassler, Cassady, Black Maria, Zonker, Gut, George Walker, Ram Rod,
   Stewart Brand, Lois Jennings, all heading toward Kesey. Hassler has a hand
   mike and he starts saying in the dark:

   "Everybody who's with us, everybody who's with us in this thing, move in
   close. If you're not part of this thing, if you're not with us, then it's
   time to leave. You can move in close and get into this thing or you can
   leave, because ... that's what time it is..."

   Shitfire! that's it-those who were a little spooked by the turn the night
   is taking are now totally spooked. People heading for the Sixth Street
   door, flapping and burbling. The Pranksters, meantime, draw in close to
   Kesey, stepping by people, over people, then settling down, nestling in a
   circle around Kesey. Others pulling in, through the darkness, toward the
   cone of light lighting up Kesey's head and back. Kesey looks distraught.
   He looks up into the light. He has a hand mike. He makes a gesture as if
   to say, Let them through-

   "I know these people," he says. "I've been with these people!"

   The whole Allegory ... A tableau of the Plains of... The tightest inner
   circle is packed in around him, then the Prankster outer circle. Then a
   few of the old Perry Lane crowd. Then various heads who are deep into the
   pudding, like Goldhill and the Kid with the Boiling Teeth, then rings and
   rings, the grades of faith . . . plus a few clumps up against the wall, of
   people with no faith at all, just too stroked out or curious to leave.
   Finally Cassady stepping over the hunkered-down, lotused, sitting bodies,
   heading toward the inner circle ... Kesey looks up at him, then he seems
   to grow dizzy and sink ... His head rolls...

   "Goodbye, Neal!" he says. He looks like he might pass out. Cassady pulls
   closer. Kesey hunches over the microphone.

   "They're saying, 'Look at him-the promising novelist... once surrounded by
   thousands... and now only these few'... But I can-"

   -he drops the thought, however. The whole place is quiet and dark, just
   one small spotlight on Kesey ...

   "Get Faye and the kids." Silence. Then a rustle of Faye coming through the
   clump of people, leading the little girl, Shannon, and the oldest boy,
   Zane, and carrying the youngest, Jed. They've all been in the nursery
   section up by the Sixth Street door. One of them is crying, only it is
   like a scream. That's all you hear in here, it's eerie ... Faye and the
   kids and Mountain Girl and Sunshine and all the Pranksters in a tight
   circle with Kesey. They all hold hands and close their eyes. Silence. Then
   the scream again

   Archetypical! Mind Power!

   Then a voice from one of the clumps of people by the wall, some girl, with
   a spondee voice like a Ouija medium:

   "The-child-is-cry-ing-Do-some-thing-for-the- child-first-"

   Kesey says nothing. His eyes are shut tight. The high keening sound rises
   from the circle with the kid's scream weaving through it. Fantastic mind
   power crackle-Goldhill registers the energy

   They're almost

   But the girl on the other side doesn't let up: "See-a-bout-
   the-child-A-Child-is-cry-ing-That's-all-that's-
   hap-pening-A-child-is-cry-ing-and-no-one-is- do-ing-any-thing-a-bout- it-"

   Almost have it-presque vu!

   "-Why-is-the-child-cry-ing-Doesn't-an-y-bo-dy- care?-"

   Feel it! The vibration level!

   Kesey looks up. The spot hits him in the face. The Pranksters release
   hands. The music starts up. The Anonymous Artists of runenca play a rock
   'n' roll version of Pomp and Circumstance with drum flourishes...

   The Acid Test Graduation

   By now the crowd is down to about fifty. The lights come up a little
   around the stage, but the rest of the garage is dark. Cassady is up on the
   stage in front of a microphone. He has on nothing but a pair of khakis
   hung down on his hips and a mortarboard hat on his head, the kind you
   graduate in. In one hand he has a whole stack of diplomas. He's wound up
   like a motorcycle, kicking and twitching and ticking and jerking at the
   knees, the elbows, the head ... He's off on a dazzling run of words. The
   Anonymous Artists of America keep rolling away behind him. Every time the
   little blond girl on the drums gives the drums a good swat, Cassady
   stiffens, a spasmodic jerk, as if somebody just kicked him in the small of
   the back. He's rapping away, he's handing out the diplomas for the Acid
   Test Graduation. It's coming off after all... now ... when? what the hell
   time is it? Five o'clock in the morning or ... who the hell knows... Kesey
   is in the dimness sunk into the great easy chair. Some of the... graduates
   are here, Pranksters mainly. They put on black caps and gowns and come
   bouncing up to the stage and get a diploma from Cassady ... scrolly
   convoluted things done by Paul Foster and the God Rotor....

   Gut the Hell's Angel lets out a whoop and does a little dance as his name
   is called. Many of the graduates aren't there. The Who Cares Girl...

   "The Who Cares Girl," says Cassady. "Now, the Who Cares Girl couldn't be
   with us this evening, you understand, had to check in for choir practice
   in the oat bin two hundred fine voices tuned to a split hair screaming the
   name of the cowboy known as Ray, you understand, couldn't be with us
   either-ahem-lost in a Band-Aid factory swabbing the jake seats with A-200
   ..."

   ... and the drums roll and Cassady stiffens and jerks and twitches and the
   Pranksters hasten forward, Hassler, Babbs, Zonker, The Hermit, Mountain
   Girl, Gretch, Paul Foster, Black Maria, Page, Walker, Hagen, Doris Delay,
   Roy Seburn, flying up and back in black robes... graduate- into what on
   the horizon ... as the light of dawn breaks through the crack in the
   garage door behind the bandstand. Those cold goddamn silver slivers... and
   the light rises in the garage, a cockroach orange dimness, and there is
   perfect silence, the world stroked out this way and that as in ... Lucite
   . .. And the heat of the day creeps in, and rising out of the funk and the
   musk and the Rat grease smears-now come the cinches, mites, crab lice,
   fleas, fruit flies, grubs, weevils, all the microbes and larval ooze-and
   start writhing and crawling and festering and frying and wriggling and
   sizzling. The straight world breathes in, coughs, gags, spaghetti trapped
   in every glottis and flapping in panic ...

   Back among the acid heads of San Francisco there were two or three days of
   post mortems after the collapse of the Prankster Winterland fantasy and
   the strange night in the garage. A little breast-beating here and there
   ... Oh, did we give in to Fear and Doubts, which a good head cannot
   afford, and thereby stop a brave cat from doing his thing... But just as
   many said, Kesey was out to freak us out or cop out on us, and it was just
   as well. And then the communal mind, not willing to be anti-freak-out,
   settled on the cop-out theory of it. Kesey had been just copping out all
   along, to keep from going to jail. That settled something else, too, the
   troublesome... souped-up thing the Pranksters were always into, this
   400-horsepower takeoff game, this American flag-flying game, this Day-Glo
   game, this yea-saying game, this dread neon game, this... superhero game,
   all wired-up and wound up and amplified in the electropastel chrome game
   gleam. It wasn't the Buddha, not for a moment. Life is shit, said the
   Buddha, a duress of bad karmas, and satori is passive, just lying back and
   grooving and grokking on the Overmind and leave Teddy Roosevelt out of it.
   Grace is in a/far country, India by name .. . Oh, the art of living in
   India, brothers... And so what if there is no plumbing and the streets are
   dirty, they have mastered the art of living . . .

   The Pranksters had cleared all their debris out of the garage before the
   Calliope Company had moved back in, and they had piled it up in the vacant
   lot next door and then they headed off to Babbs's old place, the spread,
   in Santa Cruz. The Prankster debris lay there in the lot, a vast weird
   junkhead of bits and pieces of costumes and masks and pieces of wood with
   Day-Glo paint all over them and weird signs painted in Day-Glo on swaths
   of butcher paper and it lay there writhing like a maniac all day, and at
   night... it glowed ... A blot on the escutcheon of Harriet Street. The
   neighbors there, industrious Japanese and others, were disadvantaged
   souls, but they had their pride and they formed a delegation to City Hall
   to insist on keeping their neighborhood clean. The Mayor's Office saw it
   as an example of the kind of neighborhood pride that regenerates the City,
   for if they could instill the good burgher spirit in even so lowly a
   neighborhood as the Tenderloin ... So the Mayor announced utmost
   cooperation and it became a regular ceremony, with officials showing up
   along with the Sanitmen, and the TV crews. And the City pitched in,
   joining forces with the good neighbors of Harriet Street, in the
   ceremonial destruction of the weird junk heap-Christ only knew what insane
   degenerate wino generations had combined to nearly take over this poor
   forgotten street like jungle rot. The Day-Glo paint sputtered and sizzled
   to the end . ..

   The Calliope Company held an Acid Test in the garage, and Cassady,
   wheeling around San Francisco in his latest car, heard about it somehow
   and showed up that night. He came in the doorway on the Harriet Street
   side, now marked 69 Harriet Street, after the humor of the times, and he
   was jerking and kicking at top speed to the unseen Joe Cuba ... He was
   sailing on speed, as the thirty or forty heads there could tell by the way
   his eyes jumped around, going tic tac tok tok tok tak toc tac tok tik tik
   tik tik tik tac tok tac tok tik tik tik tik tik toc tac toc tac toc
   tac-either that or he was amazed at this Acid Test through and through.
   There were no lights except the slowest and most fluid light projections,
   no noise except the most mellifluous hi-fi playing. .. what the fock...
   sitar? sitar? sitar? ... The garage was scrubbed and chaste and pure with
   wall hangings of the most meticulous sort, India-print coverlets, delicate
   and intricate of pure vegetable macrobiotic dyes. A few crystals in the
   air picked up rays of light one by one like ... jewels... And all the good
   heads were stroked out most silently, propped up sitting against the walls
   or stretched out, each grooving on his own private inward thing,
   receptacles of the Buddha, the All-one invited guest, and the Buddha could
   have walked in at any moment and felt right at home, 485 b.c. or right
   now, the ...

   .. . dead-ass little gook ... Cassady can't believe it... He is rapping a
   mile a minute, but nobody picks him up on it. They just stare at him
   through great amethyst eyes, full of tolerance and pity as his own eyes
   sprocket and his shoulders bob and weave...

   "Hey ! Don't you want to do anything--get it started, you understand-slide
   it around-"

   They just stare at him, peaceful luminescent violet jewel children,
   smiling like a bunch of freaking nuns, full of peace and tolerance and
   pity ... as he turns around shaking his head and his shoulders and kicking
   and flailing disappearing out onto Harriet Street again.

   OH CHRIST ANOTHER LITTLE BUD IN THE HEAVES AND GASSES of the discovery
   pangs. Her eyes are opened up like morning-glories, her lips are wet and
   glistening, she smiles like an entranced nun, her teeth are beginning to
   sizzle ... hold on to the thoracic box. She has her face right up in
   yours, everybody's, and she is saying, ecstatic with the discovery-

   "I'm-I'm-I'm-I'm-getting the picture! We're-all here-right? We're all
   here! We're-he-e-e-e-e-e-ere!" and her hand pans around to take in the
   Fantasia in-the-beginning cosmos... which is, in fact, only a place known
   as The Barn, in Scotts Valley, ten miles from Santa Cruz. The Barn is
   Scotts Valley's first psychedelic nightspot, a great barn, truly, once
   converted into a theater and now into a psychedelic nightspot run by Leon
   Taboory, Scotts Valley's first, and last, to hear the grousing from the
   church down the way and the local constables and townfolk and the local
   paper, but ne'mind all that. To the little girl it's her first glimpse of
   Heaven itself, zonked as she is on LSD, her first capsule-

   "I'm-getting the picture! We're all he-e-e-e-e-ere and we can do anything
   we want!"

   -revealing all this to Doris Delay and Zonker, Doris, like a good old
   helpful hand, says, "That's right. We're all here and everything's all
   right and you're fine."

   The little bud sinks into a folding chair beside Doris's and gives her a
   look. "I should be suspicious of you . .."

   "The paranoia stage," Doris says to Zonker. I love to tell the story-

   "... because I'm stoned."

   "I know," says Doris. To tell the old, old story-love and glory now
   playing in your neighborhood for the first run, in Scotts Valley ...

   About eighty of the local heads and hipfolk and jazz buffs, etc., in here
   listening to a jazz trio called The New Dimensions, Dave Molinari, Andrew
   Shushkoff, and a stocky little guy playing the bass. The little guy has on
   a sporty-type hat, wears it while he plays, his signature, you understand,
   and a pair of Cuban wrap-around sunglasses, although it is dark and
   appropriately nightclubby, except for some light projections, which makes
   it... psychedelic ... ah ummmmmm ... and he is kneading and slapping and
   flummoxing the bass like the creamy days of Siam Stewart. The New
   Dimensions-now that's very funny, you know. Ken Kesey and the Merry
   Pranksters have to smile over that. Kesey and the Pranksters are off to
   one side of the Barn waiting for their turn to go on, setting up their
   instruments, the electric guitars and basses, Gretch's Hammond organ,
   Walker's drums, and the goddamnedest gleaming heap of wires, dials,
   amplifiers, speakers, headsets, mikes-testing, testing-The New Dimensions.
   .. Yeah. The trio is like a throwback to the late 1940s and the early
   1950s when jazz was, like, the final form, funky and so fine. Molinari-or
   is it Shushkoff?-goes into a hell of a riff--Oh Christ, remember?-on the
   piano, with his head dug down deep into the profound soul funky depths of
   this thing. It's so . . . well, nostalgic . . . Scotts Valley troops into
   post-World War II hip America . . .

   The Pranksters have their own speakers set up all over the barn and Babbs
   is trying to test the microphones, watching for the needle to jump over
   the dials... Babbs has on his Day-Glo spirit mask and it glows in the
   dark, also a Shazam shirt and pants of many stripes and colors and he
   blows into the microphones, then hums a bit and watches the needles, then
   keens a bit, then croons a bit, and that's nice, so he tries a little
   ululation, and that's nicer, and pretty soon he is keening and gooning
   along with the New Dimensions and his voice sails through their sound like
   a stoned ghost on the airwaves. Kesey sits on a folding chair in the
   Control Center testing the headsets. Cassady has the Rat-tar, now painted
   an infinite number of colors and totally without strings. Doris Delay
   plays kindly aunt with the zonked-out little girl who's getting the
   picture . . .

   The New Dimensions finish their set and they're mad as hell, of course.
   What. . . cube was doing that screaming bit, f'r chrissake . . . The three
   of them come stomping up to the likely suspects, the Pranksters, led by
   the stocky guy with the hat and sunglasses. He walks up to Babbs and says,

   "Like, I mean, who's doing all that-"

   "Doing what?" says Babbs.

   "Like, later, man, don't give me the doing-what bit. You know doing-what,
   man. I mean like-"

   "Was somebody doing something?"

   "Like, I mean, that's... later! You know! I mean, it... grates!"

   "Oh, you mean that funny noise! I'd say feedback."

   "Sure! Feedback!"

   "Yeah! Yeah! Right! Right! Right!" Just a parlor sport, this is . . .
   fella could do it with his left hand. The little guy is furious. He tries
   to find the words to express his utter loathing.

   "Like, man, this fuck-up bit on somebody else's set-it's so - square!"

   There! he said it! the worst insult he knows! Next, the fire next
   time-Kesey steps in as the peacemaker: "He wasn't working against you-he
   was trying to play with you."

   The little guy stares at Kesey but doesn't say anything. He just screams
   it again into the void: "Like, it's so - square!"

   "Yeah! Yeah! Right! Right! Right!" says Babbs. "And there's the guy who
   did it!" and he points at Cool Breeze, who is sitting at a little table
   with a candle on it, hunched over a piece of paper, doing some kind of
   intense meth-like drawing. "There he goes!" says Cassady, picking up on
   the thing. "Takes a phantom heart to catch a Cool Breeze, you understand-"
   and so forth and so on, a shuck, in a word, never trust a Prankster ...
   And the New Dimensions walk off, disgusted ...

   They refuse to play any more and start packing up their instruments, which
   leaves Taboory, The Barn's manager, in a bind. He can't figure out who the
   hell to alienate. Kesey is a giant... on the other hand, the New
   Dimensions can play ... But too late for all that. The New Dimensions
   stomp out, thumbing their noses at the whole scene. The Pranksters wind up
   for their set. They clamp on their headsets. The headsets are wired up to
   a variable-lag system. So the Pranksters don't hear what they are playing
   right now but what they were playing a second ago. They harmonize off
   themselves, break up all learned progressions, and only they can hear the
   full... orchestration, a symphony in their cortices, the music of the
   Prankster ... ah ummmm ... Only the kids in The Barn, can't figure out
   what's going on... It's like, weird... The Pranksters put on their
   headsets and pick up their instruments, Kesey on an electric guitar, Page
   on an electric guitar, also Hassler, Babbs on an electric bass, Gretch on
   the electric organ, George Walker on the drums. They look all ready to go,
   but nothing happens. They're waiting ... for the... energy ... to build
   up, to come crackling over the headsets ... the spontaneous burst... but
   nothing works. Somebody starts and nobody else can pick it up and soon
   it's obvious that none of these crazy-looking people is going to play the
   instruments, except for the drummer .. . and they're not playing songs,
   they make it up as they go along . . . the leader, the muscular guy,
   Kesey, singing:

   "It's a .. . road map! .. . that ought to have been issued, about how to
   reach the edge of time ... on a horse who flies in tungsten red . .."

   And the guy in the mask on the bass singing: ". . . floods of screams on
   the beach in bomby raids of bloody rainbows ... It's dark and I lose my
   vision ..."

   Well... the kids start leaving ... what the hell...

   Babbs belches over a microphone. That gets a laugh. But is it art? Kesey
   barks like a dog. George Walker says over his microphone: "Where'd that
   dog go? I heard a... dog!... under my very feet!"

   They slough to a halt. Hassler starts chanting into his microphone, which
   is wired in only to the headsets... Only Pranksters can hear:

   "Begin it like we began ... at the beginning... Do it like we did... at
   the beginning ... In the beginning... in the beginning ..." Chanting over
   the inner space network.

   But the slump and the slough are total.. /The kids all going in droves now
   ... Just the Pranksters left... An atmosphere of total tedium ... It's ...
   all... too ... much ... for mortal-

   Even Pranksters drifting off... leaving the main floor, going
   downstairs... Hagen shakes his head. "It's like a wake .. ." It's that
   burnt-out husk of the dark hours of the morning ... Black Maria finds a
   mattress in a utility room and lies down .. .Cassady, not high at all-low,
   in fact-offers to drive a girl home ... Now it's just Kesey on the
   electric guitar and Babbs on the electric bass, them and their head-sets
   picking up the sound of their instruments and their song in variable lag .
   . . Taboory himself, the manager, can't take it any more ... "Just shut
   the door tight when you leave," he tells Kesey, and he takes off... All
   the lights are out now, just a little glow from the dials of Prankster
   Control Center ... Kesey and Babbs have their eyes closed, strumming
   slowly ... alone in the center of the vast gloom of the barn ... The whole
   world contracts, draws closer and deeper and crawls inside the headsets,
   ricocheting in variable lag in the small hours, and Kesey sings over his
   guitar, which twangs and wobbles:

   "... and every now and then you can hear her blowing smoke rings around a
   cloud and trying to lace up her shoe .. ."

   And Babbs: "... and the message goes out and it breaks out just a little
   bit but-stops-"

   And Kesey: "It's kind of hard, playing cello on a hypodermic needle and
   using a petrified bat as a bow ..."

   And Babbs: "Yes, it's hard working with these materials, without the grins
   falling off your knees . .."

   And Kesey: ".. . and the soldiers think of the lowly fleas..."

   And- "... the latrines wade back up around my knees..."

   "So let's set here in this dilapidated people hutch and think about the
   things we've done ..."

   "... Yes... down in Mississippi, that bitch girl we diddled in the cotton
   fields . . ."

   "Still. .. you want to catch the first subway to Heaven ..."

   "If I can get myself a new set of scales, I'll get my ass off this third
   rail.. . and so saying, he stood up and retched and looked down on the
   rail on sparks and long and hairy slavers of various flavors of dark
   intestinal brown ...".

   "... and his teeth fell out by the dozen and Hitler and his infested
   cousins began to grow in the cellar like a new hybrid corn and the crows
   wouldn't touch him ..."

   "... and up the rail, old True Blue wiped his nose on his uncle's clothes
   ..."

   "I took some pseulobin and one long diddle ..."

   "We blew it!"

   "... Ten thousand times or more ..."

   "We blew it!"

   ". .. so much we can't keep score ..."

   "We blew it!"

   "... just when you're beginning to think, 'I'm going to score'..."

   "We blew it!"

   ". . . but there's more in store .. ."

   "We blew it!"

   "... if we can get rid of these trading stamps that get in the way of the
   merchandise ..."

   "We blew it!"

   "... Ten million times or more! ..."

   "We blew it!"

   "... it was perfect, so what do you do? ..."

   "We blew it!"

   ". . . perfect! . . ."

   "We blew it!"

                                    Epilogue

   THREE WEEKS LATER, NOVEMBER 30, KESEY WENT ON TRIAL IN San Francisco for
   possession of marijuana-the bust on the rooftop. It ended with a hung
   jury, split 8 to 4 against him. Kesey's retrial, in April, ended with
   another hung jury, 11 to 1 against him this time. Rather than try him
   again, however, the state let him plead nolo contendere to a lesser
   charge, "knowingly being in a place where marijuana was kept." He got 90
   days. In May he lost in his appeal of the original San Mateo County
   conviction for possession of marijuana-the La Honda bust. The sentence was
   six months on a county work farm, a $1,500 fine and three years'
   probation. He was allowed to serve the other sentence, the 90 days,
   concurrently.

   Before he started serving time, Kesey took the bus and headed for his home
   town, Springfield, Oregon, with just Faye and the kids and Ram Rod on
   board. The Pranksters pretty much scattered. George Walker and Cassady
   were off in Mexico. Mountain Girl, with her baby, Sunshine, had already
   joined the Grateful Dead's group. Black Maria and Paul Foster went to the
   Hog Farm, Hugh Romney's commune near Los Angeles. Babbs and Gretch went to
   San Francisco. So did the Hermit...

   In June, Kesey began his stretch on the work farm, which was just a few
   miles from his old place in La Honda. He worked in the tailor shop. He was
   let out last November, after serving five months. He went back to Oregon,
   and he and Faye set up house in a shed on his brother Chuck's farm, up a
   gravel road south of Springfield. The shed was called the Space Heater
   House, after a gas heater inside that gave off a jet flame when it lit up.

   In February, Neal Cassady's body was found beside a railroad tract outside
   the town of San Miguel de Allende, in Mexico. Some local Americans said he
   had been going at top speed for two weeks and had headed off down the
   railroad track one night and his heart just gave out. Others said he had
   been despondent, and felt that he was growing old, and had been on a long
   downer and had made the mistake of drinking alcohol on top of
   barbiturates. His body was cremated.

   In the spring, various Pranksters. . . Babbs and Gretch, George Walker,
   Mike Hagen, Hassler, Black Maria ... began finding their way to Oregon
   from time to time. Kesey was writing again, working on a novel. The bus
   was there, parked beside the Space Heater House.

                                 Author's Note

   A NOTE ON THE WRITING OF THIS BOOK ... I HAVE TRIED NOT ONLY TO tell what
   the Pranksters did but to re-create the mental atmosphere or subjective
   reality of it. I don't think their adventure can be understood without
   that. All the events, details and dialogue I have recorded are either what
   I saw and heard myself or were told to me by people who were there
   themselves or were recorded on tapes or film or in writing. I was
   fortunate to get the help of many unusually talented and articulate
   people; most notably, Ken Kesey himself. The Pranksters recorded much of
   their own history in the Prankster Archives in the form of tapes, diaries,
   letters, photographs and the 40-hour movie of the bus trip. Kesey was also
   generous enough to allow me to draw from his letters to Larry McMurtry in
   the chapters on his flight to Mexico. Much of the dialogue and italicized
   material in Chapters XXI and XXIII is quoted from these letters.

   For all the Pranksters, as I have tried to show, the events described in
   this book were both a group adventure and a personal exploration. Many
   achieved great insight on both levels. I can think back especially to my
   talks with Mountain Girl, Hassler, Black Maria, Stewart Brand, Ken Babbs,
   Page Browning, Mike Hagen, Doris Delay, Hugh Romney, Zonker, George
   Walker, and Neal Cassady. Sandy Lehmann-Haupt told me about his Prankster
   days in especially full and penetrating detail.

   There were several excellent writers, in addition to Kesey, who were
   involved in the Prankster saga. Playwright Norman Hartweg recounted his
   experiences for me in a series of tapes. Ed McClanahan provided me with
   information about several phases of the Prankster adventure, and Robert
   Stone told me a great deal about Kesey's fugitive days in Mexico.

   Hunter Thompson made available to me several tapes he had made while
   working on his book. Hell's Angels, and parts of the book it self dealing
   with the Pranksters and the Angels were also helpful.

   I was also fortunate to find people like Clair Brush, who wrote for me a
   3,000-word description of her experience at the Watts Acid Test, much of
   which I quote in describing the Test. Of the many other people I talked to
   or corresponded with, I particularly want to mention Vic Lovell, Paul
   Sawyer, Paul Krassner, Pat Hallinan, Brian Rohan, Paul Robertson, Jerry
   Garcia, Gary Goldhill, Michael Bowen, Anne Severson, Paul Hawken, Bill
   Tara, Michael Laton, Jack the Fluke, Bill Graham, John Bartholomew Tucker,
   Roger Grimsby, Marshall Efron, Robin White, Larry McMurtry, Larry
   Schiller, Donovan Bess, Carl Lehmann-Haupt, and Mr. and Mrs. Fred Kesey.

                                About the Author

   Tom Wolfe is the author of a dozen books, among them such contemporary
   classics as The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test, The Right Stuff, The Bonfire
   of the Vanities, and A Man in Full. A native of Richmond, Virginia, he
   earned his B.A. at Washington and Lee University and a Ph.D. in American
   studies at Yale. He lives in New York City.
Woolf Short Stories
Virginia Woolf


A collection of stories by British writer Virginia Woolf: The Mark on the Wall, Kew Gardens, Solid Objects, An Unwritten Novel, A Haunted House, Monday or Tuesday, The String Quartet, Society, Blue and Green, In the Orchard, Mrs Dalloway in Bond Street, A Woman's College From Outside, The New Dress, Moments of Being, The Lady in the Looking-Glass, The Shooting Party, The Duchess and The Jeweller, Lappin and Lappinova, The Man Who Loved His Kind, The Searchlight, The Legacy, Together and Apart, A Summing Up.





Virginia Woolf

Woolf Short Stories





THE MARK ON THE WALL


Perhaps it was the middle of January in the present that I first looked up and saw the mark on the wall. In order to fix a date it is necessary to remember what one saw. So now I think of the fire; the steady film of yellow light upon the page of my book; the three chrysanthemums in the round glass bowl on the mantelpiece. Yes, it must have been the winter time, and we had just finished our tea, for I remember that I was smoking a cigarette when I looked up and saw the mark on the wall for the first time. I looked up through the smoke of my cigarette and my eye lodged for a moment upon the burning coals, and that old fancy of the crimson flag flapping from the castle tower came into my mind, and I thought of the cavalcade of red knights riding up the side of the black rock. Rather to my relief the sight of the mark interrupted the fancy, for it is an old fancy, an automatic fancy, made as a child perhaps. The mark was a small round mark, black upon the white wall, about six or seven inches above the mantelpiece.

How readily our thoughts swarm upon a new object, lifting it a little way, as ants carry a blade of straw so feverishly, and then leave it. . . If that mark was made by a nail, it can't have been for a picture, it must have been for a miniature-the miniature of a lady with white powdered curls, powder-dusted cheeks, and lips like red carnations. A fraud of course, for the people who had this house before us would have chosen pictures in that way-an old picture for an old room. That is the sort of people they were-very interesting people, and I think of them so often, in such queer places, because one will never see them again, never know what happened next. They wanted to leave this house because they wanted to change their style of furniture, so he said, and he was in process of saying that in his opinion art should have ideas behind it when we were torn asunder, as one is torn from the old lady about to pour out tea and the young man about to hit the tennis ball in the back garden of the suburban villa as one rushes past in the train.

But as for that mark, I'm not sure about it; I don't believe it was made by a nail after all; it's too big, too round, for that. I might get up, but if I got up and looked at it, ten to one I shouldn't be able to say for certain; because once a thing's done, no one ever knows how it happened. Oh! dear me, the mystery of life; The inaccuracy of thought! The ignorance of humanity! To show how very little control of our possessions we have-what an accidental affair this living is after all our civilization-let me just count over a few of the things lost in one lifetime, beginning, for that seems always the most mysterious of losses-what cat would gnaw, what rat would nibble-three pale blue canisters of book-binding tools? Then there were the bird cages, the iron hoops, the steel skates, the Queen Anne coal-scuttle, the bagatelle board, the hand organ-all gone, and jewels, too. Opals and emeralds, they lie about the roots of turnips. What a scraping paring affair it is to be sure! The wonder is that I've any clothes on my back, that I sit surrounded by solid furniture at this moment. Why, if one wants to compare life to anything, one must liken it to being blown through the Tube at fifty miles an hour-landing at the other end without a single hairpin in one's hair! Shot out at the feet of God entirely naked! Tumbling head over heels in the asphodel meadows like brown paper parcels pitched down a shoot in the post office! With one's hair flying back like the tail of a race-horse. Yes, that seems to express the rapidity of life, the perpetual waste and repair; all so casual, all so haphazard. . .

But after life. The slow pulling down of thick green stalks so that the cup of the flower, as it turns over, deluges one with purple and red light. Why, after all, should one not be born there as one is born here, helpless, speechless, unable to focus one's eyesight, groping at the roots of the grass, at the toes of the Giants? As for saying which are trees, and which are men and women, or whether there are such things, that one won't be in a condition to do for fifty years or so. There will be nothing but spaces of light and dark, intersected by thick stalks, and rather higher up perhaps, rose-shaped blots of an indistinct colour-dim pinks and blues-which will, as time goes on, become more definite, become-I don't know what. . .

And yet that mark on the wall is not a hole at all. It may even be caused by some round black substance, such as a small rose leaf, left over from the summer, and I, not being a very vigilant housekeeper-look at the dust on the mantelpiece, for example, the dust which, so they say, buried Troy three times over, only fragments of pots utterly refusing annihilation, as one can believe.

The tree outside the window taps very gently on the pane. . . I want to think quietly, calmly, spaciously, never to be interrupted, never to have to rise from my chair, to slip easily from one thing to another, without any sense of hostility, or obstacle. I want to sink deeper and deeper, away from the surface, with its hard separate facts. To steady myself, let me catch hold of the first idea that passes. . . Shakespeare. . . Well, he will do as well as another. A man who sat himself solidly in an arm-chair, and looked into the fire, so-A shower of ideas fell perpetually from some very high Heaven down through his mind. He leant his forehead on his hand, and people, looking in through the open door,-for this scene is supposed to take place on a summer's evening-But how dull this is, this historical fiction! It doesn't interest me at all. I wish I could hit upon a pleasant track of thought, a track indirectly reflecting credit upon myself, for those are the pleasantest thoughts, and very frequent even in the minds of modest mouse-coloured people, who believe genuinely that they dislike to hear their own praises. They are not thoughts directly praising oneself; that is the beauty of them; they are thoughts like this:

"And then I came into the room. They were discussing botany. I said how I'd seen a flower growing on a dust heap on the site of an old house in Kingsway. The seed, I said, must have been sown in the reign of Charles the First. What flowers grew in the reign of Charles the First?" I asked-(but, I don't remember the answer). Tall flowers with purple tassels to them perhaps. And so it goes on. All the time I'm dressing up the figure of myself in my own mind, lovingly, stealthily, not openly adoring it, for if I did that, I should catch myself out, and stretch my hand at once for a book in self-protection. Indeed, it is curious how instinctively one protects the image of oneself from idolatry or any other handling that could make it ridiculous, or too unlike the original to be believed in any longer. Or is it not so very curious after all? It is a matter of great importance. Suppose the looking glass smashes, the image disappears, and the romantic figure with the green of forest depths all about it is there no longer, but only that shell of a person which is seen by other people-what an airless, shallow, bald, prominent world it becomes! A world not to be lived in. As we face each other in omnibuses and underground railways we are looking into the mirror that accounts for the vagueness, the gleam of glassiness, in our eyes. And the novelists in future will realize more and more the importance of these reflections, for of course there is not one reflection but an almost infinite number; those are the depths they will explore, those the phantoms they will pursue, leaving the description of reality more and more out of their stories, taking a knowledge of it for granted, as the Greeks did and Shakespeare perhaps-but these generalizations are very worthless. The military sound of the word is enough. It recalls leading articles, cabinet ministers-a whole class of things indeed which as a child one thought the thing itself, the standard thing, the real thing, from which one could not depart save at the risk of nameless damnation. Generalizations bring back somehow Sunday in London, Sunday afternoon walks, Sunday luncheons, and also ways of speaking of the dead, clothes, and habits-like the habit of sitting all together in one room until a certain hour, although nobody liked it. There was a rule for everything. The rule for tablecloths at that particular period was that they should be made of tapestry with little yellow compartments marked upon them, such as you may see in photographs of the carpets in the corridors of the royal palaces. Tablecloths of a different kind were not real tablecloths. How shocking, and yet how wonderful it was to discover that these real things, Sunday luncheons, Sunday walks, country houses, and tablecloths were not entirely real, were indeed half phantoms, and the damnation which visited the disbeliever in them was only a sense of illegitimate freedom. What now takes the place of those things I wonder, those real standard things? Men perhaps, should you be a woman; the masculine point of view which governs our lives, which sets the standard, which establishes Whitaker's Table of Precedency, which has become, I suppose, since the war half a phantom to many men and women, which soon-one may hope, will be laughed into the dustbin where the phantoms go, the mahogany sideboards and the Landseer prints, Gods and Devils, Hell and so forth, leaving us all with an intoxicating sense of illegitimate freedom-if freedom exists. . .

In certain lights that mark on the wall seems actually to project from the wall. Nor is it entirely circular. I cannot be sure, but it seems to cast a perceptible shadow, suggesting that if I ran my finger down that strip of the wall it would, at a certain point, mount and descend a small tumulus, a smooth tumulus like those barrows on the South Downs which are, they say, either tombs or camps. Of the two I should prefer them to be tombs, desiring melancholy like most English people, and finding it natural at the end of a walk to think of the bones stretched beneath the turf. . . There must be some book about it. Some antiquary must have dug up those bones and given them a name. . . What sort of a man is an antiquary, I wonder? Retired Colonels for the most part, I daresay, leading parties of aged labourers to the top here, examining clods of earth and stone, and getting into correspondence with the neighbouring clergy, which, being opened at breakfast time, gives them a feeling of importance, and the comparison of arrow-heads necessitates cross-country journeys to the county towns, an agreeable necessity both to them and to their elderly wives, who wish to make plum jam or to clean out the study, and have every reason for keeping that great question of the camp or the tomb in perpetual suspension, while the Colonel himself feels agreeably philosophic in accumulating evidence on both sides of the question. It is true that he does finally incline to believe in the camp; and, being opposed, indites a pamphlet which he is about to read at the quarterly meeting of the local society when a stroke lays him low, and his last conscious thoughts are not of wife or child, but of the camp and that arrowhead there, which is now in the case at the local museum, together with the foot of a Chinese murderess, a handful of Elizabethan nails, a great many Tudor clay pipes, a piece of Roman pottery, and the wine-glass that Nelson drank out of-proving I really don't know what.

No, no, nothing is proved, nothing is known. And if I were to get up at this very moment and ascertain that the mark on the wall is really-what shall we say?-the head of a gigantic old nail, driven in two hundred years ago, which has now, owing to the patient attrition of many generations of housemaids, revealed its head above the coat of paint, and is taking its first view of modern life in the sight of a white-walled fire-lit room, what should I gain?-Knowledge? Matter for further speculation? I can think sitting still as well as standing up. And what is knowledge? What are our learned men save the descendants of witches and hermits who crouched in caves and in woods brewing herbs, interrogating shrew-mice and writing down the language of the stars? And the less we honour them as our superstitions dwindle and our respect for beauty and health of mind increases. . . Yes, one could imagine a very pleasant world. A quiet, spacious world, with the flowers so red and blue in the open fields. A world without professors or specialists or house-keepers with the profiles of policemen, a world which one could slice with one's thought as a fish slices the water with his fin, grazing the stems of the water-lilies, hanging suspended over nests of white sea eggs. . . How peaceful it is drown here, rooted in the centre of the world and gazing up through the grey waters, with their sudden gleams of light, and their reflections-if it were not for Whitaker's Almanack-if it were not for the Table of Precedency!

I must jump up and see for myself what that mark on the wall really is-a nail, a rose-leaf, a crack in the wood?

Here is nature once more at her old game of self-preservation. This train of thought, she perceives, is threatening mere waste of energy, even some collision with reality, for who will ever be able to lift a finger against Whitaker's Table of Precedency? The Archbishop of Canterbury is followed by the Lord High Chancellor; the Lord High Chancellor is followed by the Archbishop of York. Everybody follows somebody, such is the philosophy of Whitaker; and the great thing is to know who follows whom. Whitaker knows, and let that, so Nature counsels, comfort you, instead of enraging you; and if you can't be comforted, if you must shatter this hour of peace, think of the mark on the wall.

I understand Nature's game-her prompting to take action as a way of ending any thought that threatens to excite or to pain. Hence, I suppose, comes our slight contempt for men of action-men, we assume, who don't think. Still, there's no harm in putting a full stop to one's disagreeable thoughts by looking at a mark on the wall.

Indeed, now that I have fixed my eyes upon it, I feel that I have grasped a plank in the sea; I feel a satisfying sense of reality which at once turns the two Archbishops and the Lord High Chancellor to the shadows of shades. Here is something definite, something real. Thus, waking from a midnight dream of horror, one hastily turns on the light and lies quiescent, worshipping the chest of drawers, worshipping solidity, worshipping reality, worshipping the impersonal world which is a proof of some existence other than ours. That is what one wants to be sure of. . . Wood is a pleasant thing to think about. It comes from a tree; and trees grow, and we don't know how they grow. For years and years they grow, without paying any attention to us, in meadows, in forests, and by the side of rivers-all things one likes to think about. The cows swish their tails beneath them on hot afternoons; they paint rivers so green that when a moorhen dives one expects to see its feathers all green when it comes up again. I like to think of the fish balanced against the stream like flags blown out; and of water-beetles slowly raiding domes of mud upon the bed of the river. I like to think of the tree itself:-first the close dry sensation of being wood; then the grinding of the storm; then the slow, delicious ooze of sap. I like to think of it, too, on winter's nights standing in the empty field with all leaves close-furled, nothing tender exposed to the iron bullets of the moon, a naked mast upon an earth that goes tumbling, tumbling, all night long. The song of birds must sound very loud and strange in June; and how cold the feet of insects must feel upon it, as they make laborious progresses up the creases of the bark, or sun themselves upon the thin green awning of the leaves, and look straight in front of them with diamond-cut red eyes. . . One by one the fibres snap beneath the immense cold pressure of the earth, then the last storm comes and, falling, the highest branches drive deep into the ground again. Even so, life isn't done with; there are a million patient, watchful lives still for a tree, all over the world, in bedrooms, in ships, on the pavement, lining rooms, where men and women sit after tea, smoking cigarettes. It is full of peaceful thoughts, happy thoughts, this tree. I should like to take each one separately-but something is getting in the way. . . Where was I? What has it all been about? A tree? A river? The Downs? Whitaker's Almanack? The fields of asphodel? I can't remember a thing. Everything's moving, falling, slipping, vanishing. . . There is a vast upheaval of matter. Someone is standing over me and saying-

"I'm going out to buy a newspaper."

"Yes?"

"Though it's no good buying newspapers. . . Nothing ever happens. Curse this war; God damn this war! . . . All the same, I don't see why we should have a snail on our wall."

Ah, the mark on the wall! It was a snail.

1917




KEW GARDENS


From the oval-shaped flower-bed there rose perhaps a hundred stalks spreading into heart-shaped or tongue-shaped leaves half way up and unfurling at the tip red or blue or yellow petals marked with spots of colour raised upon the surface; and from the red, blue or yellow gloom of the throat emerged a straight bar, rough with gold dust and slightly clubbed at the end. The petals were voluminous enough to be stirred by the summer breeze, and when they moved, the red, blue and yellow lights passed one over the other, staining an inch of the brown earth beneath with a spot of the most intricate colour. The light fell either upon the smooth, grey back of a pebble, or, the shell of a snail with its brown, circular veins, or falling into a raindrop, it expanded with such intensity of red, blue and yellow the thin walls of water that one expected them to burst and disappear. Instead, the drop was left in a second silver grey once more, and the light now settled upon the flesh of a leaf, revealing the branching thread of fibre beneath the surface, and again it moved on and spread its illumination in the vast green spaces beneath the dome of the heart-shaped and tongue-shaped leaves. Then the breeze stirred rather more briskly overhead and the colour was flashed into the air above, into the eyes of the men and women who walk in Kew Gardens in July.

The figures of these men and women straggled past the flower-bed with a curiously irregular movement not unlike that of the white and blue butterflies who crossed the turf in zig-zag flights from bed to bed. The man was about six inches in front of the woman, strolling carelessly, while she bore on with greater purpose, only turning her head now and then to see that the children were not too far behind. The man kept this distance in front of the woman purposely, though perhaps unconsciously, for he wished to go on with his thoughts.

"Fifteen years ago I came here with Lily," he thought. "We sat somewhere over there by a lake and I begged her to marry me all through the hot afternoon. How the dragonfly kept circling round us: how clearly I see the dragonfly and her shoe with the square silver buckle at the toe. All the time I spoke I saw her shoe and when it moved impatiently I knew without looking up what she was going to say: the whole of her seemed to be in her shoe. And my love, my desire, were in the dragonfly; for some reason I thought that if it settled there, on that leaf, the broad one with the red flower in the middle of it, if the dragonfly settled on the leaf she would say "Yes" at once. But the dragonfly went round and round: it never settled anywhere-of course not, happily not, or I shouldn't be walking here with Eleanor and the children-Tell me, Eleanor. D'you ever think of the past?"

"Why do you ask, Simon?"

"Because I've been thinking of the past. I've been thinking of Lily, the woman I might have married. . . Well, why are you silent? Do you mind my thinking of the past?"

"Why should I mind, Simon? Doesn't one always think of the past, in a garden with men and women lying under the trees? Aren't they one's past, all that remains of it, those men and women, those ghosts lying under the trees. . . one's happiness, one's reality?"

"For me, a square silver shoe buckle and a dragonfly-"

"For me, a kiss. Imagine six little girls sitting before their easels twenty years ago, down by the side of a lake, painting the water-lilies, the first red water-lilies I'd ever seen. And suddenly a kiss, there on the back of my neck. And my hand shook all the afternoon so that I couldn't paint. I took out my watch and marked the hour when I would allow myself to think of the kiss for five minutes only-it was so precious-the kiss of an old grey-haired woman with a wart on her nose, the mother of all my kisses all my life. Come, Caroline, come, Hubert."

They walked on the past the flower-bed, now walking four abreast, and soon diminished in size among the trees and looked half transparent as the sunlight and shade swam over their backs in large trembling irregular patches.

In the oval flower bed the snail, whose shelled had been stained red, blue, and yellow for the space of two minutes or so, now appeared to be moving very slightly in its shell, and next began to labour over the crumbs of loose earth which broke away and rolled down as it passed over them. It appeared to have a definite goal in front of it, differing in this respect from the singular high stepping angular green insect who attempted to cross in front of it, and waited for a second with its antenna trembling as if in deliberation, and then stepped off as rapidly and strangely in the opposite direction. Brown cliffs with deep green lakes in the hollows, flat, blade-like trees that waved from root to tip, round boulders of grey stone, vast crumpled surfaces of a thin crackling texture-all these objects lay across the snail's progress between one stalk and another to his goal. Before he had decided whether to circumvent the arched tent of a dead leaf or to breast it there came past the bed the feet of other human beings.

This time they were both men. The younger of the two wore an expression of perhaps unnatural calm; he raised his eyes and fixed them very steadily in front of him while his companion spoke, and directly his companion had done speaking he looked on the ground again and sometimes opened his lips only after a long pause and sometimes did not open them at all. The elder man had a curiously uneven and shaky method of walking, jerking his hand forward and throwing up his head abruptly, rather in the manner of an impatient carriage horse tired of waiting outside a house; but in the man these gestures were irresolute and pointless. He talked almost incessantly; he smiled to himself and again began to talk, as if the smile had been an answer. He was talking about spirits-the spirits of the dead, who, according to him, were even now telling him all sorts of odd things about their experiences in Heaven.

"Heaven was known to the ancients as Thessaly, William, and now, with this war, the spirit matter is rolling between the hills like thunder." He paused, seemed to listen, smiled, jerked his head and continued:-

"You have a small electric battery and a piece of rubber to insulate the wire-isolate?-insulate?-well, we'll skip the details, no good going into details that wouldn't be understood-and in short the little machine stands in any convenient position by the head of the bed, we will say, on a neat mahogany stand. All arrangements being properly fixed by workmen under my direction, the widow applies her ear and summons the spirit by sign as agreed. Women! Widows! Women in black-"

Here he seemed to have caught sight of a woman's dress in the distance, which in the shade looked a purple black. He took off his hat, placed his hand upon his heart, and hurried towards her muttering and gesticulating feverishly. But William caught him by the sleeve and touched a flower with the tip of his walking-stick in order to divert the old man's attention. After looking at it for a moment in some confusion the old man bent his ear to it and seemed to answer a voice speaking from it, for he began talking about the forests of Uruguay which he had visited hundreds of years ago in company with the most beautiful young woman in Europe. He could be heard murmuring about forests of Uruguay blanketed with the wax petals of tropical roses, nightingales, sea beaches, mermaids, and women drowned at sea, as he suffered himself to be moved on by William, upon whose face the look of stoical patience grew slowly deeper and deeper.

Following his steps so closely as to be slightly puzzled by his gestures came two elderly women of the lower middle class, one stout and ponderous, the other rosy cheeked and nimble. Like most people of their station they were frankly fascinated by any signs of eccentricity betokening a disordered brain, especially in the well-to-do; but they were too far off to be certain whether the gestures were merely eccentric or genuinely mad. After they had scrutinised the old man's back in silence for a moment and given each other a queer, sly look, they went on energetically piecing together their very complicated dialogue:

"Nell, Bert, Lot, Cess, Phil, Pa, he says, I says, she says, I says, I says, I says-"

"My Bert, Sis, Bill, Grandad, the old man, sugar, Sugar, flour, kippers, greens, Sugar, sugar, sugar."

The ponderous woman looked through the pattern of falling words at the flowers standing cool, firm, and upright in the earth, with a curious expression. She saw them as a sleeper waking from a heavy sleep sees a brass candlestick reflecting the light in an unfamiliar way, and closes his eyes and opens them, and seeing the brass candlestick again, finally starts broad awake and stares at the candlestick with all his powers. So the heavy woman came to a standstill opposite the oval-shaped flower bed, and ceased even to pretend to listen to what the other woman was saying. She stood there letting the words fall over her, swaying the top part of her body slowly backwards and forwards, looking at the flowers. Then she suggested that they should find a seat and have their tea.

The snail had now considered every possible method of reaching his goal without going round the dead leaf or climbing over it. Let alone the effort needed for climbing a leaf, he was doubtful whether the thin texture which vibrated with such an alarming crackle when touched even by the tip of his horns would bear his weight; and this determined him finally to creep beneath it, for there was a point where the leaf curved high enough from the ground to admit him. He had just inserted his head in the opening and was taking stock of the high brown roof and was getting used to the cool brown light when two other people came past outside on the turf. This time they were both young, a young man and a young woman. They were both in the prime of youth, or even in that season which precedes the prime of youth, the season before the smooth pink folds of the flower have burst their gummy case, when the wings of the butterfly, though fully grown, are motionless in the sun.

"Lucky it isn't Friday," he observed.

"Why? D'you believe in luck?"

"They make you pay sixpence on Friday."

"What's sixpence anyway? Isn't it worth sixpence?"

"What's 'it'-what do you mean by 'it'?"

"O, anything-I mean-you know what I mean."

Long pauses came between each of these remarks; they were uttered in toneless and monotonous voices. The couple stood still on the edge of the flower bed, and together pressed the end of her parasol deep down into the soft earth. The action and the fact that his hand rested on the top of hers expressed their feelings in a strange way, as these short insignificant words also expressed something, words with short wings for their heavy body of meaning, inadequate to carry them far and thus alighting awkwardly upon the very common objects that surrounded them, and were to their inexperienced touch so massive; but who knows (so they thought as they pressed the parasol into the earth) what precipices aren't concealed in them, or what slopes of ice don't shine in the sun on the other side? Who knows? Who has ever seen this before? Even when she wondered what sort of tea they gave you at Kew, he felt that something loomed up behind her words, and stood vast and solid behind them; and the mist very slowly rose and uncovered-O, Heavens, what were those shapes?-little white tables, and waitresses who looked first at her and then at him; and there was a bill that he would pay with a real two shilling piece, and it was real, all real, he assured himself, fingering the coin in his pocket, real to everyone except to him and to her; even to him it began to seem real; and then-but it was too exciting to stand and think any longer, and he pulled the parasol out of the earth with a jerk and was impatient to find the place where one had tea with other people, like other people.

"Come along, Trissie; it's time we had our tea."

"Wherever DOES one have one's tea?" she asked with the oddest thrill of excitement in her voice, looking vaguely round and letting herself be drawn on down the grass path, trailing her parasol, turning her head this way and that way, forgetting her tea, wishing to go down there and then down there, remembering orchids and cranes among wild flowers, a Chinese pagoda and a crimson crested bird; but he bore her on.

Thus one couple after another with much the same irregular and aimless movement passed the flower-bed and were enveloped in layer after layer of green blue vapour, in which at first their bodies had substance and a dash of colour, but later both substance and colour dissolved in the green-blue atmosphere. How hot it was! So hot that even the thrush chose to hop, like a mechanical bird, in the shadow of the flowers, with long pauses between one movement and the next; instead of rambling vaguely the white butterflies danced one above another, making with their white shifting flakes the outline of a shattered marble column above the tallest flowers the glass roofs of the palm house shone as if a whole market full of shiny green umbrellas had opened in the sun; and in the drone of the aeroplane the voice of the summer sky murmured its fierce soul. Yellow and black, pink and snow white, shapes of all these colours, men, women, and children were spotted for a second upon the horizon, and then, seeing the breadth of yellow that lay upon the grass, they wavered and sought shade beneath the trees, dissolving like drops of water in the yellow and green atmosphere, staining it faintly with red and blue. It seemed as if all gross and heavy bodies had sunk down in the heat motionless and lay huddled upon the ground, but their voices went wavering from them as if they were flames lolling from the thick waxen bodies of candles. Voices. Yes, voices. Wordless voices, breaking the silence suddenly with such depth of contentment, such passion of desire, or, in the voices of children, such freshness of surprise; breaking the silence? But there was no silence; all the time the motor omnibuses were turning their wheels and changing their gear; like a vast nest of Chinese boxes all of wrought steel turning ceaselessly one within another the city murmured; on the top of which the voices cried aloud and the petals of myriads of flowers flashed their colours into the air.

1919




SOLID OBJECTS


The only thing that moved upon the vast semicircle of the beach was one small black spot. As it came nearer to the ribs and spine of the stranded pilchard boat, it became apparent from a certain tenuity in its blackness that this spot possessed four legs; and moment by moment it became more unmistakable that it was composed of the persons of two young men. Even thus in outline against the sand there was an unmistakable vitality in them; an indescribable vigour in the approach and withdrawal of the bodies, slight though it was, which proclaimed some violent argument issuing from the tiny mouths of the little round heads. This was corroborated on closer view by the repeated lunging of a walking-stick on the right-hand side. "You mean to tell me . . . You actually believe . . ." thus the walkingstick on the right-hand side next the waves seemed to be asserting as it cut long straight stripes upon the sand.

"Politics be damned!" issued clearly from the body on the left-hand side, and, as these words were uttered, the mouths, noses, chins, little moustaches, tweed caps, rough boots, shooting coats, and check stockings of the two speakers became clearer and clearer; the smoke of their pipes went up into the air; nothing was so solid, so living, so hard, red, hirsute and virile as these two bodies for miles and miles of sea and sandhill.

They flung themselves down by the six ribs and spine of the black pilchard boat. You know how the body seems to shake itself free from an argument, and to apologize for a mood of exaltation; flinging itself down and expressing in the looseness of its attitude a readiness to take up with something new-whatever it may be that comes next to hand. So Charles, whose stick had been slashing the beach for half a mile or so, began skimming flat pieces of slate over the water; and John, who had exclaimed "Politics be damned!" began burrowing his fingers down, down, into the sand. As his hand went further and further beyond the wrist, so that he had to hitch his sleeve a little higher, his eyes lost their intensity, or rather the background of thought and experience which gives an inscrutable depth to the eyes of grown people disappeared, leaving only the clear transparent surface, expressing nothing but wonder, which the eyes of young children display. No doubt the act of burrowing in the sand had something to do with it. He remembered that, after digging for a little, the water oozes round your finger-tips; the hole then becomes a moat; a well; a spring; a secret channel to the sea. As he was choosing which of these things to make it, still working his fingers in the water, they curled round something hard-a full drop of solid matter-and gradually dislodged a large irregular lump, and brought it to the surface. When the sand coating was wiped off, a green tint appeared. It was a lump of glass, so thick as to be almost opaque; the smoothing of the sea had completely worn off any edge or shape, so that it was impossible to say whether it had been bottle, tumbler or window-pane; it was nothing but glass; it was almost a precious stone. You had only to enclose it in a rim of gold, or pierce it with a wire, and it became a jewel; part of a necklace, or a dull, green light upon a finger. Perhaps after all it was really a gem; something worn by a dark Princess trailing her finger in the water as she sat in the stern of the boat and listened to the slaves singing as they rowed her across the Bay. Or the oak sides of a sunk Elizabethan treasure-chest had split apart, and, rolled over and over, over and over, its emeralds had come at last to shore. John turned it in his hands; he held it to the light; he held it so that its irregular mass blotted out the body and extended right arm of his friend. The green thinned and thickened slightly as it was held against the sky or against the body. It pleased him; it puzzled him; it was so hard, so concentrated, so definite an object compared with the vague sea and the hazy shore.

Now a sigh disturbed him-profound, final, making him aware that his friend Charles had thrown all the flat stones within reach, or had come to the conclusion that it was not worth while to throw them. They ate their sandwiches side by side. When they had done, and were shaking themselves and rising to their feet, John took the lump of glass and looked at it in silence. Charles looked at it too. But he saw immediately that it was not flat, and filling his pipe he said with the energy that dismisses a foolish strain of thought:

"To return to what I was saying-"

He did not see, or if he had seen would hardly have noticed, that John, after looking at the lump for a moment, as if in hesitation, slipped it inside his pocket. That impulse, too, may have been the impulse which leads a child to pick up one pebble on a path strewn with them, promising it a life of warmth and security upon the nursery mantelpiece, delighting in the sense of power and benignity which such an action confers, and believing that the heart of the stone leaps with joy when it sees itself chosen from a million like it, to enjoy this bliss instead of a life of cold and wet upon the high road. "It might so easily have been any other of the millions of stones, but it was I, I, I!"

Whether this thought or not was in John's mind, the lump of glass had its place upon the mantelpiece, where it stood heavy upon a little pile of bills and letters and served not only as an excellent paper-weight, but also as a natural stopping place for the young man's eyes when they wandered from his book. Looked at again and again half consciously by a mind thinking of something else, any object mixes itself so profoundly with the stuff of thought that it loses its actual form and recomposes itself a little differently in an ideal shape which haunts the brain when we least expect it. So John found himself attracted to the windows of curiosity shops when he was out walking, merely because he saw something which reminded him of the lump of glass. Anything, so long as it was an object of some kind, more or less round, perhaps with a dying flame deep sunk in its mass, anything-china, glass, amber, rock, marble-even the smooth oval egg of a prehistoric bird would do. He took, also, to keeping his eyes upon the ground, especially in the neighbourhood of waste land where the household refuse is thrown away. Such objects often occurred there-thrown away, of no use to anybody, shapeless, discarded. In a few months he had collected four or five specimens that took their place upon the mantelpiece. They were useful, too, for a man who is standing for Parliament upon the brink of a brilliant career has any number of papers to keep in order-addresses to constituents, declarations of policy, appeals for subscriptions, invitations to dinner, and so on.

One day, starting from his rooms in the Temple to catch a train in order to address his constituents, his eyes rested upon a remarkable object lying half-hidden in one of those little borders of grass which edge the bases of vast legal buildings. He could only touch it with the point of his stick through the railings; but he could see that it was a piece of china of the most remarkable shape, as nearly resembling a starfish as anything-shaped, or broken accidentally, into five irregular but unmistakable points. The colouring was mainly blue, but green stripes or spots of some kind overlaid the blue, and lines of crimson gave it a richness and lustre of the most attractive kind. John was determined to possess it; but the more he pushed, the further it receded. At length he was forced to go back to his rooms and improvise a wire ring attached to the end of a stick, with which, by dint of great care and skill, he finally drew the piece of china within reach of his hands. As he seized hold of it he exclaimed in triumph. At that moment the clock struck. It was out of the question that he should keep his appointment. The meeting was held without him. But how had the piece of china been broken into this remarkable shape? A careful examination put it beyond doubt that the star shape was accidental, which made it all the more strange, and it seemed unlikely that there should be another such in existence. Set at the opposite end of the mantelpiece from the lump of glass that had been dug from the sand, it looked like a creature from another world-freakish and fantastic as a harlequin. It seemed to be pirouetting through space, winking light like a fitful star. The contrast between the china so vivid and alert, and the glass so mute and contemplative, fascinated him, and wondering and amazed he asked himself how the two came to exist in the same world, let alone to stand upon the same narrow strip of marble in the same room. The question remained unanswered.

He now began to haunt the places which are most prolific of broken china, such as pieces of waste land between railway lines, sites of demolished houses, and commons in the neighbourhood of London. But china is seldom thrown from a great height; it is one of the rarest of human actions. You have to find in conjunction a very high house, and a woman of such reckless impulse and passionate prejudice that she flings her jar or pot straight from the window without thought of who is below. Broken china was to be found in plenty, but broken in some trifling domestic accident, without purpose or character. Nevertheless, he was often astonished as he came to go into the question more deeply, by the immense variety of shapes to be found in London alone, and there was still more cause for wonder and speculation in the differences of qualities and designs. The finest specimens he would bring home and place upon his mantelpiece, where, however, their duty was more and more of an ornamental nature, since papers needing a weight to keep them down became scarcer and scarcer.

He neglected his duties, perhaps, or discharged them absent-mindedly, or his constituents when they visited him were unfavourably impressed by the appearance of his mantelpiece. At any rate he was not elected to represent them in Parliament, and his friend Charles, taking it much to heart and hurrying to condole with him, found him so little cast down by the disaster that he could only suppose that it was too serious a matter for him to realize all at once.

In truth, John had been that day to Barnes Common, and there under a furze bush had found a very remarkable piece of iron. It was almost identical with the glass in shape, massy and globular, but so cold and heavy, so black and metallic, that it was evidently alien to the earth and had its origin in one of the dead stars or was itself the cinder of a moon. It weighed his pocket down; it weighed the mantelpiece down; it radiated cold. And yet the meteorite stood upon the same ledge with the lump of glass and the star-shaped china.

As his eyes passed from one to another, the determination to possess objects that even surpassed these tormented the young man. He devoted himself more and more resolutely to the search. If he had not been consumed by ambition and convinced that one day some newly-discovered rubbish heap would reward him, the disappointments he had suffered, let alone the fatigue and derision, would have made him give up the pursuit. Provided with a bag and a long stick fitted with an adaptable hook, he ransacked all deposits of earth; raked beneath matted tangles of scrub; searched all alleys and spaces between walls where he had learned to expect to find objects of this kind thrown away. As his standard became higher and his taste more severe the disappointments were innumerable, but always some gleam of hope, some piece of china or glass curiously marked or broken lured him on. Day after day passed. He was no longer young. His career-that is his political career-was a thing of the past. People gave up visiting him. He was too silent to be worth asking to dinner. He never talked to anyone about his serious ambitions; their lack of understanding was apparent in their behaviour.

He leaned back in his chair now and watched Charles lift the stones on the mantelpiece a dozen times and put them down emphatically to mark what he was saying about the conduct of the Government, without once noticing their existence.

"What was the truth of it, John?" asked Charles suddenly, turning and facing him. "What made you give it up like that all in a second?"

"I've not given it up," John replied.

"But you've not the ghost of a chance now," said Charles roughly.

"I don't agree with you there," said John with conviction. Charles looked at him and was profoundly uneasy; the most extraordinary doubts possessed him; he had a queer sense that they were talking about different things. He looked round to find some relief for his horrible depression, but the disorderly appearance of the room depressed him still further. What was that stick, and the old carpet bag hanging against the wall? And then those stones? Looking at John, something fixed and distant in his expression alarmed him. He knew only too well that his mere appearance upon a platform was out of the question.

"Pretty stones," he said as cheerfully as he could; and saying that he had an appointment to keep, he left John-for ever.

1920




AN UNWRITTEN NOVEL


Such an expression of unhappiness was enough by itself to make one's eyes slide above the paper's edge to the poor woman's face-insignificant without that look, almost a symbol of human destiny with it. Life's what you see in people's eyes; life's what they learn, and, having learnt it, never, though they seek to hide it, cease to be aware of-what? That life's like that, it seems. Five faces opposite-five mature faces-and the knowledge in each face. Strange, though, how people want to conceal it! Marks of reticence are on all those faces: lips shut, eyes shaded, each one of the five doing something to hide or stultify his knowledge. One smokes; another reads; a third checks entries in a pocket book; a fourth stares at the map of the line framed opposite; and the fifth-the terrible thing about the fifth is that she does nothing at all. She looks at life. Ah, but my poor, unfortunate woman, do play the game-do, for all our sakes, conceal it!

As if she heard me, she looked up, shifted slightly in her seat and sighed. She seemed to apologise and at the same time to say to me, "If only you knew!" Then she looked at life again. "But I do know," I answered silently, glancing at the TIMES for manners' sake. "I know the whole business. 'Peace between Germany and the Allied Powers was yesterday officially ushered in at Paris-Signor Nitti, the Italian Prime Minister-a passenger train at Doncaster was in collision with a goods train. . .' We all know-the TIMES knows-but we pretend we don't." My eyes had once more crept over the paper's rim She shuddered, twitched her arm queerly to the middle of her back and shook her head. Again I dipped into my great reservoir of life. "Take what you like," I continued, "births, deaths, marriages, Court Circular, the habits of birds, Leonardo da Vinci, the Sandhills murder, high wages and the cost of living-oh, take what you like," I repeated, "it's all in the TIMES!" Again with infinite weariness she moved her head from side to side until, like a top exhausted with spinning, it settled on her neck.

The TIMES was no protection against such sorrow as hers. But other human beings forbade intercourse. The best thing to do against life was to fold the paper so that it made a perfect square, crisp, thick, impervious even to life. This done, I glanced up quickly, armed with a shield of my own. She pierced through my shield; she gazed into my eyes as if searching any sediment of courage at the depths of them and damping it to clay. Her twitch alone denied all hope, discounted all illusion.

So we rattled through Surrey and across the border into Sussex. But with my eyes upon life I did not see that the other travellers had left, one by one, till, save for the man who read, we were alone together. Here was Three Bridges station. We drew slowly down the platform and stopped. Was he going to leave us? I prayed both ways-I prayed last that he might stay. At that instant he roused himself, crumpled his paper contemptuously, like a thing done with, burst open the door, and left us alone.

The unhappy woman, leaning a little forward, palely and colourlessly addressed me-talked of stations and holidays, of brothers at Eastbourne, and the time of year, which was, I forget now, early or late. But at last looking from the window and seeing, I knew, only life, she breathed, "Staying away-that's the drawback of it-" Ah, now we approached the catastrophe, "My sister-in-law"-the bitterness of her tone was like lemon on cold steel, and speaking, not to me, but to herself, she muttered, "nonsense, she would say-that's what they all say," and while she spoke she fidgeted as though the skin on her back were as a plucked fowl's in a poulterer's shop-window.

"Oh, that cow!" she broke off nervously, as though the great wooden cow in the meadow had shocked her and saved her from some indiscretion. Then she shuddered, and then she made the awkward angular movement that I had seen before, as if, after the spasm, some spot between the shoulders burnt or itched. Then again she looked the most unhappy woman in the world, and I once more reproached her, though not with the same conviction, for if there were a reason, and if I knew the reason, the stigma was removed from life.

"Sisters-in-law," I said-

Her lips pursed as if to spit venom at the word; pursed they remained. All she did was to take her glove and rub hard at a spot on the window-pane. She rubbed as if she would rub something out for ever-some stain, some indelible contamination. Indeed, the spot remained for all her rubbing, and back she sank with the shudder and the clutch of the arm I had come to expect. Something impelled me to take my glove and rub my window. There, too, was a little speck on the glass. For all my rubbing it remained. And then the spasm went through me I crooked my arm and plucked at the middle of my back. My skin, too, felt like the damp chicken's skin in the poulterer's shop-window; one spot between the shoulders itched and irritated, felt clammy, felt raw. Could I reach it? Surreptitiously I tried. She saw me. A smile of infinite irony, infinite sorrow, flitted and faded from her face. But she had communicated, shared her secret, passed her poison she would speak no more. Leaning back in my corner, shielding my eyes from her eyes, seeing only the slopes and hollows, greys and purples, of the winter's landscape, I read her message, deciphered her secret, reading it beneath her gaze.

Hilda's the sister-in-law. Hilda? Hilda? Hilda Marsh-Hilda the blooming, the full bosomed, the matronly. Hilda stands at the door as the cab draws up, holding a coin. "Poor Minnie, more of a grasshopper than ever-old cloak she had last year. Well, well, with too children these days one can't do more. No, Minnie, I've got it; here you are, cabby-none of your ways with me. Come in, Minnie. Oh, I could carry YOU, let alone your basket!" So they go into the dining-room. "Aunt Minnie, children."

Slowly the knives and forks sink from the upright. Down they get (Bob and Barbara), hold out hands stiffly; back again to their chairs, staring between the resumed mouthfuls. Now, Minnie, the door's shut; Hilda heavily descends to the basement; you unstrap the straps of your basket, lay on the bed a meagre nightgown, stand side by side furred felt slippers. The looking-glass-no, you avoid the looking-glass. Some methodical disposition of hat-pins. Perhaps the shell box has something in it? You shake it; it's the pearl stud there was last year-that's all. And then the sniff, the sigh, the sitting by the window. Three o'clock on a December afternoon; the rain drizzling; one light low in the skylight of a drapery emporium; another high in a servant's bedroom-this one goes out. That gives her nothing to look at. A moment's blankness-then, what are you thinking? (Let me peep across at her opposite; she's asleep or pretending it; so what would she think about sitting at the window at three o'clock in the afternoon? Health, money, bills, her God?) Yes, sitting on the very edge of the chair looking over the roofs of Eastbourne, Minnie Marsh prays to Gods. That's all very well; and she may rub the pane too, as though to see God better; but what God does she see? Who's the God of Minnie Marsh, the God of the back streets of Eastbourne, the God of three o'clock in the afternoon? I, too, see roofs, I see sky; but, oh, dear-this seeing of Gods! More like President Kruger than Prince Albert-that's the best I can do for him; and I see him on a chair, in a black frock-coat, not so very high up either; I can manage a cloud or two for him to sit on; and then his hand trailing in the cloud holds a rod, a truncheon is it?-black, thick, thorned-a brutal old bully-Minnie's God! Did he send the itch and the patch and the twitch? Is that why she prays? What she rubs on the window is the stain of sin. Oh, she committed some crime!

I have my choice of crimes. The woods flit and fly-in summer there are bluebells; in the opening there, when Spring comes, primroses. A parting, was it, twenty years ago? Vows broken? Not Minnie's! . . . She was faithful. How she nursed her mother! All her savings on the tombstone wreaths under glass-daffodils in jars. But I'm off the track. A crime. . . They would say she kept her sorrow, suppressed her secret-her sex, they'd say-the scientific people. But what flummery to saddle her with sex! No-more like this. Passing down the streets of Croydon twenty years ago, the violet loops of ribbon in the draper's window spangled in the electric light catch her eye. She lingers-past six. Still by running she can reach home. She pushes through the glass swing door. It's sale-time. Shallow trays brim with ribbons. She pauses, pulls this, fingers that with the raised roses on it-no need to choose, no need to buy, and each tray with its surprises. "We don't shut till seven," and then it is seven. She runs, she rushes, home she reaches, but too late. Neighbours-the doctor-baby brother-the kettle-scalded-hospital dead-or only the shock of it, the blame? Ah, but the detail matters nothing! It's what she carries with her; the spot, the crime, the thing to expiate, always there between her shoulders.

"Yes," she seems to nod to me, "it's the thing I did."

Whether you did, or what you did, I don't mind; it's not the thing I want. The draper's window looped with violet-that'll do; a little cheap perhaps, a little commonplace-since one has a choice of crimes, but then so many (let me peep across again-still sleeping, or pretending sleep! white, worn, the mouth closed-a touch of obstinacy, more than one would think-no hint of sex)-so many crimes aren't your crime; your crime was cheap; only the retribution solemn; for now the church door opens, the hard wooden pew receives her; on the brown tiles she kneels; every day, winter, summer, dusk, dawn (here she's at it) prays. All her sins fall, fall, for ever fall. The spot receives them. It's raised, it's red, it's burning. Next she twitches. Small boys point. "Bob at lunch to-day"-But elderly women are the worst.

Indeed now you can't sit praying any longer. Kruger's sunk beneath the clouds-washed over as with a painter's brush of liquid grey, to which he adds a tinge of black-even the tip of the truncheon gone now. That's what always happens! Just as you've seen him, felt him, someone interrupts. It's Hilda now.

How you hate her! She'll even lock the bathroom door overnight, too, though it's only cold water you want, and sometimes when the night's been bad it seems as if washing helped. And John at breakfast-the children-meals are worst, and sometimes there are friends-ferns don't altogether hide 'em-they guess, too; so out you go along the front, where the waves are grey, and the papers blow, and the glass shelters green and draughty, and the chairs cost tuppence-too much-for there must be preachers along the sands. Ah, that's a nigger-that's a funny man-that's a man with parakeets-poor little creatures! Is there no one here who thinks of God?-just up there, over the pier, with his rod-but no-there's nothing but grey in the sky or if it's blue the white clouds hide him, and the music-it's military music-and what they are fishing for? Do they catch them? How the children stare! Well, then home a back way-"Home a back way!" The words have meaning; might have been spoken by the old man with whiskers-no, no, he didn't really speak; but everything has meaning-placards leaning against doorways-names above shop-windows-red fruit in baskets-women's heads in the hairdresser's-all say "Minnie Marsh!" But here's a jerk. "Eggs are cheaper!" That's what always happens! I was heading her over the waterfall, straight for madness, when, like a flock of dream sheep, she turns t'other way and runs between my fingers. Eggs are cheaper. Tethered to the shores of the world, none of the crimes, sorrows, rhapsodies, or insanities for poor Minnie Marsh; never late for luncheon; never caught in a storm without a mackintosh; never utterly unconscious of the cheapness of eggs. So she reaches home-scrapes her boots.

Have I read you right? But the human face-the human face at the top of the fullest sheet of print holds more, withholds more. Now, eyes open, she looks out; and in the human eye-how d'you define it?-there's a break-a division-so that when you've grasped the stem the butterfly's off-the moth that hangs in the evening over the yellow flower-move, raise your hand, off, high, away. I won't raise my hand. Hang still, then, quiver, life, soul, spirit, whatever you are of Minnie Marsh-I, too, on my flower-the hawk over the down-alone, or what were the worth of life? To rise; hang still in the evening, in the midday; hang still over the down. The flicker of a hand-off, up! then poised again. Alone, unseen; seeing all so still down there, all so lovely. None seeing, none caring. The eyes of others our prisons; their thoughts our cages. Air above, air below. And the moon and immortality. . . Oh, but I drop to the turf! Are you down too, you in the corner, what's your name-woman-Minnie Marsh; some such name as that? There she is, tight to her blossom; opening her hand-bag, from which she takes a hollow shell-an egg-who was saying that eggs were cheaper? You or I? Oh, it was you who said it on the way home, you remember, when the old gentleman, suddenly opening his umbrella-or sneezing was it? Anyhow, Kruger went, and you came "home a back way," and scraped your boots. Yes. And now you lay across your knees a pocket-handkerchief into which drop little angular fragments of eggshell-fragments of a map-a puzzle. I wish I could piece them together! If you would only sit still. She's moved her knees-the map's in bits again. Down the slopes of the Andes the white blocks of marble go bounding and hurtling, crushing to death a whole troop of Spanish muleteers, with their convoy-Drake's booty, gold and silver. But to return-

To what, to where? She opened the door, and, putting her umbrella in the stand-that goes without saying; so, too, the whiff of beef from the basement; dot, dot, dot. But what I cannot thus eliminate, what I must, head down, eyes shut, with the courage of a battalion and the blindness of a bull, charge and disperse are, indubitably, the figures behind the ferns, commercial travellers. There I've hidden them all this time in the hope that somehow they'd disappear, or better still emerge, as indeed they must, if the story's to go on gathering richness and rotundity, destiny and tragedy, as stories should, rolling along with it two, if not three, commercial travellers and a whole grove of aspidistra. "The fronds of the aspidistra only partly concealed the commercial traveller-" Rhododendrons would conceal him utterly, and into the bargain give me my fling of red and white, for which I starve and strive; but rhododendrons in Eastbourne-in December-on the Marshes' table-no, no, I dare not; it's all a matter of crusts and cruets, frills and ferns. Perhaps there'll be a moment later by the sea. Moreover, I feel, pleasantly pricking through the green fretwork and over the glacis of cut glass, a desire to peer and peep at the man opposite-one's as much as I can manage. James Moggridge is it, whom the Marshes call Jimmy? James Moggridge travels in-shall we say buttons?-but the time's not come for bringing them in-the big and the little on the long cards, some peacock-eyed, others dull gold; cairngorms some, and others coral sprays-but I say the time's not come. He travels, and on Thursdays, his Eastbourne day, takes his meals with the Marshes. His red face, his little steady eyes-by no means. altogether commonplace-his enormous appetite (that's safe; he won't look at Minnie till the bread's swamped the gravy dry), napkin tucked diamond-wise-but this is primitive, and, whatever it may do the reader, don't take me in. Let's dodge to the Moggridge household, set that in motion. Well, the family boots are mended on Sundays by James himself. He reads Truth. But his passion? Roses-and his wife a retired hospital nurse-interesting-for God's sake let me have one woman with a name I like! But no; she's of the unborn children of the mind, illicit, none the less loved, like my rhododendrons. How many die in every novel that's written-the best, the dearest, while Moggridge lives. It's life's fault. Here's Minnie eating her egg at the moment opposite and at t'other end of the line-are we past Lewes?-there must be Jimmy-or what's her twitch for?

There must be Moggridge-life's fault. Life imposes her laws; life blocks the way; life's behind the fern; life's the tyrant; oh, but not the bully! No, for I assure you I come willingly; I come wooed by Heaven knows what compulsion across ferns and cruets, table splashed and bottles smeared. I come irresistibly to lodge myself somewhere on the firm flesh, in the robust spine, wherever I can penetrate or find foothold on the person, in the soul, of Moggridge the man. The enormous stability of the fabric; the spine tough as whalebone, straight as oaktree; the ribs radiating branches; the flesh taut tarpaulin; the red hollows; the suck and regurgitation of the heart; while from above meat falls in brown cubes and beer gushes to be churned to blood again-and so we reach the eyes. Behind the aspidistra they see something: black, white, dismal; now the plate again; behind the aspidistra they see elderly woman; "Marsh's sister, Hilda's more my sort;" the tablecloth now. "Marsh would know what's wrong with Morrises. . ." talk that over; cheese has come; the plate again; turn it round-the enormous fingers; now the woman opposite. "Marsh's sister-not a bit like Marsh; wretched, elderly female. . . You should feed your hens. . . God's truth, what's set her twitching? Not what I said? Dear, dear, dear! these elderly women. Dear, dear!"

"Dear, dear, dear!" How beautiful the sound is! like the knock of a mallet on seasoned timber, like the throb of the heart of an ancient whaler when the seas press thick and the green is clouded. "Dear, dear!" what a passing bell for the souls of the fretful to soothe them and solace them, lap them in linen, saying, "So long. Good luck to you!" and then, "What's your pleasure?" for though Moggridge would pluck his rose for her, that's done, that's over. Now what's the next thing? "Madam, you'll miss your train," for they don't linger.

That's the man's way; that's the sound that reverberates; that's St. Paul's and the motor-omnibuses. But we're brushing the crumbs off. Oh, Moggridge, you won't stay? You must be off? Are you driving through Eastbourne this afternoon in one of those little carriages? Are you man who's walled up in green cardboard boxes, and sometimes has the blinds down, and sometimes sits so solemn staring like a sphinx, and always there's a look of the sepulchral, something of the undertaker, the coffin, and the dusk about horse and driver? Do tell me-but the doors slammed. We shall never meet again. Moggridge, farewell!

Yes, yes, I'm coming. Right up to the top of the house. One moment I'll linger. How the mud goes round in the mind-what a swirl these monsters leave, the waters rocking, the weeds waving and green here, black there, striking to the sand, till by degrees the atoms reassemble, the deposit sifts itself, and again through the eyes one sees clear and still, and there comes to the lips some prayer for the departed, some obsequy for the souls of those one nods to, the people one never meets again.

James Moggridge is dead now, gone for ever. Well, Minnie-"I can face it no longer." If she said that-(Let me look at her. She is brushing the eggshell into deep declivities). She said it certainly, leaning against the wall of the bedroom, and plucking at the little balls which edge the claret-coloured curtain. But when the self speaks to the self, who is speaking?-the entombed soul, the spirit driven in, in, in to the central catacomb; the self that took the veil and left the world-a coward perhaps, yet somehow beautiful, as it flits with its lantern restlessly up and down the dark corridors. "I can bear it no longer," her spirit says. "That man at lunch-Hilda-the children." Oh, heavens, her sob! It's the spirit wailing its destiny, the spirit driven hither, thither, lodging on the diminishing carpets-meagre footholds-shrunken shreds of all the vanishing universe-love, life, faith, husband, children, I know not what splendours and pageantries glimpsed in girlhood. "Not for me-not for me."

But then-the muffins, the bald elderly dog? Bead mats I should fancy and the consolation of underlinen. If Minnie Marsh were run over and taken to hospital, nurses and doctors themselves would exclaim. . . There's the vista and the vision-there's the distance-the blue blot at the end of the avenue, while, after all, the tea is rich, the muffin hot, and the dog-"Benny, to your basket, sir, and see what mother's brought you!" So, taking the glove with the worn thumb, defying once more the encroaching demon of what's called going in holes, you renew the fortifications, threading the grey wool, running it in and out.

Running it in and out, across and over, spinning a web through which God himself-hush, don't think of God! How firm the stitches are! You must be proud of your darning. Let nothing disturb her. Let the light fall gently, and the clouds show an inner vest of the first green leaf. Let the sparrow perch on the twig and shake the raindrop hanging to the twig's elbow. . . Why look up? Was it a sound, a thought? Oh, heavens! Back again to the thing you did, the plate glass with the violet loops? But Hilda will come. Ignominies, humiliations, oh! Close the breach.

Having mended her glove, Minnie Marsh lays it in the drawer. She shuts the drawer with decision. I catch sight of her face in the glass. Lips are pursed. Chin held high. Next she laces her shoes. Then she touches her throat. What's your brooch? Mistletoe or merry-thought? And what is happening? Unless I'm much mistaken, the pulse's quickened, the moment's coming, the threads are racing, Niagara's ahead. Here's the crisis! Heaven be with you! Down she goes. Courage, courage! Face it, be it! For God's sake don't wait on the mat now! There's the door! I'm on your side. Speak! Confront her, confound her soul!

"Oh, I beg your pardon! Yes, this is Eastbourne. I'll reach it down for you. Let me try the handle."

"That's all your luggage?"

"Much obliged, I'm sure."

(But why do you look about you? Hilda don't come to the station, nor John; and Moggridge is driving at the far side of Eastbourne).

"I'll wait by my bag, ma'am, that's safest. He said he'd meet me. . . Oh, there he is! That's my son."

So they walk off together.

Well, but I'm confounded. . . Surely, Minnie, you know better! A strange young man. . . Stop! I'll tell him-Minnie!-Miss Marsh!-I don't know though. There's something queer in her cloak as it blows. Oh, but it's untrue, it's indecent. . . Look how he bends as they reach the gateway. She finds her ticket. What's the joke? Off they go, down the road, side by side. . . Well, my world's done for! What do I stand on? What do I know? That's not Minnie. There never was Moggridge. Who am I? Life's bare as bone.

And yet the last look of them-he stepping from the kerb and she following him round the edge of the big building brims me with wonder-floods me anew. Mysterious figures! Mother and son. Who are you? Why do you walk down the street? Where to-night will you sleep, and then, to-morrow? Oh, how it whirls and surges-floats me afresh! I start after them. People drive this way and that. The white light splutters and pours. Plate-glass windows. Carnations; chrysanthemums. Ivy in dark gardens. Milk carts at the door. Wherever I go, mysterious figures, I see you, turning the corner, mothers and sons; you, you, you. I hasten, I follow. This, I fancy, must be the sea. Grey is the landscape; dim as ashes; the water murmurs and moves. If I fall on my knees, if I go through the ritual, the ancient antics, it's you, unknown figures, you I adore; if I open my arms, it's you I embrace, you I draw to me-adorable world!

1920




A HAUNTED HOUSE


Whatever hour you woke there was a door shunting. From room to room they went, hand in hand, lifting here, opening there, making sure-a ghostly couple.

"Here we left it," she said. And he added, "Oh, but here too!" "It's upstairs," she murmured. "And in the garden," he whispered "Quietly," they said, "or we shall wake them."

But it wasn't that you woke us. Oh, no. "They're looking for it; they're drawing the curtain," one might say, and so read on a page or two. "Now they've found it," one would be certain, stopping the pencil on the margin. And then, tired of reading, one might rise and see for oneself, the house all empty, the doors standing open, only the wood pigeons bubbling with content and the hum of the threshing machine sounding from the farm. "What did I come in here for? What did I want to find?" My hands were empty. "Perhaps it's upstairs then?" The apples were in the loft. And so down again, the garden still as ever, only the book had slipped into the grass.

But they had found it in the drawing room. Not that one could ever see them. The window panes reflected apples, reflected roses; all the leaves were green in the glass. If they moved in the drawing room, the apple only turned its yellow side. Yet, the moment after, if the door was opened, spread about the floor, hung upon the walls, pendant from the ceiling-what? My hands were empty. The shadow of a thrush crossed the carpet; from the deepest wells of silence the wood pigeon drew its bubble of sound. "Safe, safe, safe," the pulse of the house beat softly. "The treasure buried; the room. . ." the pulse stopped short. Oh, was that the buried treasure?

A moment later the light had faded. Out in the garden then? But the trees spun darkness for a wandering beam of sun. So fine, so rare, coolly sunk beneath the surface the beam I sought always burnt behind the glass. Death was the glass; death was between us; coming to the woman first, hundreds of years ago, leaving the house, sealing all the windows; the rooms were darkened. He left it, left her, went North, went East, saw the stars turned in the Southern sky; sought the house, found it dropped beneath the Downs. "Safe, safe, safe," the pulse of the house beat gladly. "The Treasure yours."

The wind roars up the avenue. Trees stoop and bend this way and that. Moonbeams splash and spill wildly in the rain. But the beam of the lamp falls straight from the window. The candle burns stiff and still. Wandering through the house, opening the windows, whispering not to wake us, the ghostly couple seek their joy.

"Here we slept," she says. And he adds, "Kisses without number." "Waking in the morning-" "Silver between the trees-" "Upstairs-" "In the garden-" "When summer came-" "In winter snowtime-" The doors go shutting far in the distance, gently knocking like the pulse of a heart.

Nearer they come; cease at the doorway. The wind falls, the rain slides silver down the glass. Our eyes darken; we hear no steps beside us; we see no lady spread her ghostly cloak. His hands shield the lantern. "Look," he breathes. "Sound asleep. Love upon their lips."

Stooping, holding their silver lamp above us, long they look and deeply. Long they pause. The wind drives straightly; the flame stoops slightly. Wild beams of moonlight cross both floor and wall, and, meeting, stain the faces bent; the faces pondering; the faces that search the sleepers and seek their hidden joy.

"Safe, safe, safe," the heart of the house beats proudly. "Long years-" he sighs. "Again you found me." "Here," she murmurs, "sleeping; in the garden reading; laughing, rolling apples in the loft. Here we left our treasure-" Stooping, their light lifts the lids upon my eyes. "Safe! safe! safe!" the pulse of the house beats wildly. Waking, I cry "Oh, is this your buried treasure? The light in the heart."

1921




MONDAY OR TUESDAY


Lazy and indifferent, shaking space easily from his wings, knowing his way, the heron passes over the church beneath the sky. White and distant, absorbed in itself, endlessly the sky covers and uncovers, moves and remains. A lake? Blot the shores of it out! A mountain? Oh, perfect-the sun gold on its slopes. Down that falls. Ferns then, or white feathers, for ever and ever-

Desiring truth, awaiting it, laboriously distilling a few words, for ever desiring-(a cry starts to the left, another to the right. Wheels strike divergently. Omnibuses conglomerate in conflict)-for ever desiring-(the clock asseverates with twelve distinct strokes that it is midday; light sheds gold scales; children swarm)-for ever desiring truth. Red is the dome; coins hang on the trees; smoke trails from the chimneys; bark, shout, cry "Iron for sale"-and truth?

Radiating to a point men's feet and women's feet, black or gold-encrusted-(This foggy weather-Sugar? No, thank you-The commonwealth of the future)-the firelight darting and making the room red, save for the black figures and their bright eyes, while outside a van discharges, Miss Thingummy drinks tea at her desk, and plate-glass preserves fur coats-

Flaunted, leaf-light, drifting at corners, blown across the wheels, silver-splashed, home or not home, gathered, scattered, squandered in separate scales, swept up, down, torn, sunk, assembled-and truth?

Now to recollect by the fireside on the white square of marble. From ivory depths words rising shed their blackness, blossom and penetrate. Fallen the book; in the flame, in the smoke, in the momentary sparks-or now voyaging, the marble square pendant, minarets beneath and the Indian seas, while space rushes blue and stars glint-truth? content with closeness?

Lazy and indifferent the heron returns; the sky veils her stars; then bares them.

1921




THE STRING QUARTET


Well, here we are, and if you cast your eye over the room you will see that Tubes and trams and omnibuses, private carriages not a few, even, I venture to believe, landaus with bays in them, have been busy at it, weaving threads from one end of London to the other. Yet I begin to have my doubts-

If indeed it's true, as they're saying, that Regent Street is up, and the Treaty signed, and the weather not cold for the time of year, and even at that rent not a flat to be had, and the worst of influenza its after effects; if I bethink me of having forgotten to write about the leak in the larder, and left my glove in the train; if the ties of blood require me, leaning forward, to accept cordially the hand which is perhaps offered hesitatingly-

"Seven years since we met!"

"The last time in Venice."

"And where are you living now?"

"Well, the late afternoon suits me the best, though, if it weren't asking too much-"

"But I knew you at once!"

"Still, the war made a break-"

If the mind's shot through by such little arrows, and-for human society compels it-no sooner is one launched than another presses forward; if this engenders heat and in addition they've turned on the electric light; if saying one thing does, in so many cases, leave behind it a need to improve and revise, stirring besides regrets, pleasures, vanities, and desires-if it's all the facts I mean, and the hats, the fur boas, the gentlemen's swallow-tail coats, and pearl tie-pins that come to the surface-what chance is there?

Of what? It becomes every minute more difficult to say why, in spite of everything, I sit here believing I can't now say what, or even remember the last time it happened.

"Did you see the procession?"

"The King looked cold."

"No, no, no. But what was it?"

"She's bought a house at Malmesbury."

"How lucky to find one!"

On the contrary, it seems to me pretty sure that she, whoever she may be, is damned, since it's all a matter of flats and hats and sea gulls, or so it seems to be for a hundred people sitting here well dressed, walled in, furred, replete. Not that I can boast, since I too sit passive on a gilt chair, only turning the earth above a buried memory, as we all do, for there are signs, if I'm not mistaken, that we're all recalling something, furtively seeking something. Why fidget? Why so anxious about the sit of cloaks; and gloves-whether to button or unbutton? Then watch that elderly face against the dark canvas, a moment ago urbane and flushed; now taciturn and sad, as if in shadow. Was it the sound of the second violin tuning in the ante-room? Here they come; four black figures, carrying instruments, and seat themselves facing the white squares under the downpour of light; rest the tips of their bows on the music stand; with a simultaneous movement lift them; lightly poise them, and, looking across at the player opposite, the first violin counts one, two, three-

Flourish, spring, burgeon, burst! The pear tree on the top of the mountain. Fountains jet; drops descend. But the waters of the Rhone flow swift and deep, race under the arches, and sweep the trailing water leaves, washing shadows over the silver fish, the spotted fish rushed down by the swift waters, now swept into an eddy where-it's difficult this-conglomeration of fish all in a pool; leaping, splashing, scraping sharp fins; and such a boil of current that the yellow pebbles are churned round and round, round and round-free now, rushing downwards, or even somehow ascending in exquisite spirals into the air; curled like thin shavings from under a plane; up and up. . . How lovely goodness is in those who, stepping lightly, go smiling through the world! Also in jolly old fishwives, squatted under arches, oh scene old women, how deeply they laugh and shake and rollick, when they walk, from side to side, hum, hah!

"That's an early Mozart, of course-"

"But the tune, like all his tunes, makes one despair-I mean hope. What do I mean? That's the worst of music! I want to dance, laugh, eat pink cakes, yellow cakes, drink thin, sharp wine. Or an indecent story, now-I could relish that. The older one grows the more one likes indecency. Hall, hah! I'm laughing. What at? You said nothing, nor did the old gentleman opposite. . . But suppose-suppose-Hush!"

The melancholy river bears us on. When the moon comes through the trailing willow boughs, I see your face, I hear your voice and the bird singing as we pass the osier bed. What are you whispering? Sorrow, sorrow. Joy, joy. Woven together, like reeds in moonlight. Woven together, inextricably commingled, bound in pain and strewn in sorrow-crash!

The boat sinks. Rising, the figures ascend, but now leaf thin, tapering to a dusky wraith, which, fiery tipped, draws its twofold passion from my heart. For me it sings, unseals my sorrow, thaws compassion, floods with love the sunless world, nor, ceasing, abates its tenderness but deftly, subtly, weaves in and out until in this pattern, this consummation, the cleft ones unify; soar, sob, sink to rest, sorrow and joy.

Why then grieve? Ask what? Remain unsatisfied? I say all's been settled; yes; laid to rest under a coverlet of rose leaves, falling. Falling. Ah, but they cease. One rose leaf, falling from an enormous height, like a little parachute dropped from an invisible balloon, turns, flutters waveringly. It won't reach us.

"No, no. I noticed nothing. That's the worst of music-these silly dreams. The second violin was late, you say?"

"There's old Mrs. Munro, feeling her way out-blinder each year, poor woman-on this slippery floor."

Eyeless old age, grey-headed Sphinx. . . There she stands on the pavement, beckoning, so sternly, the red omnibus.

"How lovely! How well they play! How-how-how!"

The tongue is but a clapper. Simplicity itself. The feathers in the hat next me are bright and pleasing as a child's rattle. The leaf on the plane-tree flashes green through the chink in the curtain. Very strange, very exciting.

"How-how-how!" Hush!

These are the lovers on the grass.

"If, madam, you will take my hand-"

"Sir, I would trust you with my heart. Moreover, we have left our bodies in the banqueting hall. Those on the turf are the shadows of our souls."

"Then these are the embraces of our souls." The lemons nod assent. The swan pushes from the bank and floats dreaming into mid stream.

"But to return. He followed me down the corridor, and, as we turned the corner, trod on the lace of my petticoat. What could I do but cry 'Ah!' and stop to finger it? At which he drew his sword, made passes as if he were stabbing something to death, and cried, 'Mad! Mad! Mad!' Whereupon I screamed, and the Prince, who was writing in the large vellum book in the oriel window, came out in his velvet skull-cap and furred slippers, snatched a rapier from the wall-the King of Spain's gift, you know-on which I escaped, flinging on this cloak to hide the ravages to my skirt-to hide. . . But listen! the horns!"

The gentleman replies so fast to the lady, and she runs up the scale with such witty exchange of compliment now culminating in a sob of passion, that the words are indistinguishable though the meaning is plain enough-love, laughter, flight, pursuit, celestial bliss-all floated out on the gayest ripple of tender endearment-until the sound of the silver horns, at first far distant, gradually sounds more and more distinctly, as if seneschals were saluting the dawn or proclaiming ominously the escape of the lovers. . . The green garden, moonlit pool, lemons, lovers, and fish are all dissolved in the opal sky, across which, as the horns are joined by trumpets and supported by clarions there rise white arches firmly planted on marble pillars. . . Tramp and trumpeting. Clang and clangour. Firm establishment. Fast foundations. March of myriads. Confusion and chaos trod to earth. But this city to which we travel has neither stone nor marble; hangs enduring; stands unshakable; nor does a face, nor does a flag greet or welcome. Leave then to perish your hope; droop in the desert my joy; naked advance. Bare are the pillars; auspicious to none; casting no shade; resplendent; severe. Back then I fall, eager no more, desiring only to go, find the street, mark the buildings, greet the applewoman, say to the maid who opens the door: A starry night.

"Good night, good night. You go this way?"

"Alas. I go that."

1921




SOCIETY


This is how it all came about. Six or seven of us were sitting one day after tea. Some were gazing across the street into the windows of a milliner's shop where the light still shone brightly upon scarlet feathers and golden slippers. Others were idly occupied in building little towers of sugar upon the edge of the tea tray. After a time, so far as I can remember, we drew round the fire and began as usual to praise men-how strong, how noble, how brilliant, how courageous, how beautiful they were-how we envied those who by hook or by crook managed to get attached to one for life-when Poll, who had said nothing, burst into tears. Poll, I must tell you, has always been queer. For one thing her father was a strange man. He left her a fortune in his will, but on condition that she read all the books in the London Library. We comforted her as best we could; but we knew in our hearts how vain it was. For though we like her, Poll is no beauty; leaves her shoe laces untied; and must have been thinking, while we praised men, that not one of them would ever wish to marry her. At last she dried her tears. For some time we could make nothing of what she said. Strange enough it was in all conscience. She told us that, as we knew, she spent most of her time in the London Library, reading. She had begun, she said, with English literature on the top floor; and was steadily working her way down to the Times on the bottom. And now half, or perhaps only a quarter, way through a terrible thing had happened. She could read no more. Books were not what we thought them. "Books," she cried, rising to her feet and speaking with an intensity of desolation which I shall never forget, "are for the most part unutterably bad!"

Of course we cried out that Shakespeare wrote books, and Milton and Shelley.

"Oh, yes," she interrupted us. "You've been well taught, I can see. But you are not members of the London Library." Here her sobs broke forth anew. At length, recovering a little, she opened one of the pile of books which she always carried about with her-"From a Window" or "In a Garden," or some such name as that it was called, and it was written by a man called Benton or Henson, or something of that kind. She read the first few pages. We listened in silence. "But that's not a book," someone said. So she chose another. This time it was a history, but I have forgotten the writer's name. Our trepidation increased as she went on. Not a word of it seemed to be true, and the style in which it was written was execrable.

"Poetry! Poetry!" we cried, impatiently.

"Read us poetry!" I cannot describe the desolation which fell upon us as she opened a little volume and mouthed out the verbose, sentimental foolery which it contained.

"It must have been written by a woman," one of us urged. But no. She told us that it was written by a young man, one of the most famous poets of the day. I leave you to imagine what the shock of the discovery was. Though we all cried and begged her to read no more, she persisted and read us extracts from the Lives of the Lord Chancellors. When she had finished, Jane, the eldest and wisest of us, rose to her feet and said that she for one was not convinced.

"Why," she asked, "if men write such rubbish as this, should our mothers have wasted their youth in bringing them into the world?"

We were all silent; and, in the silence, poor Poll could be heard sobbing out, "Why, why did my father teach me to read?"

Clorinda was the first to come to her senses. "It's all our fault," she said. "Every one of us knows how to read. But no one, save Poll, has ever taken the trouble to do it. I, for one, have taken it for granted that it was a woman's duty to spend her youth in bearing children. I venerated my mother for bearing ten; still more my grandmother for bearing fifteen; it was, I confess, my own ambition to bear twenty. We have gone on all these ages supposing that men were equally industrious, and that their works were of equal merit. While we have borne the children, they, we supposed, have borne the books and the pictures. We have populated the world. They have civilized it. But now that we can read, what prevents us from judging the results? Before we bring another child into the world we must swear that we will find out what the world is like."

So we made ourselves into a society for asking questions. One of us was to visit a man-of-war; another was to hide herself in a scholar's study; another was to attend a meeting of business men; while all were to read books, look at pictures, go to concerts, keep our eyes open in the streets, and ask questions perpetually. We were very young. You can judge of our simplicity when I tell you that before parting that night we agreed that the objects of life were to produce good people and good books. Our questions were to be directed to finding out how far these objects were now attained by men. We vowed solemnly that we would not bear a single child until we were satisfied.

Off we went then, some to the British Museum; others to the King's Navy; some to Oxford; others to Cambridge; we visited the Royal Academy and the Tate; heard modern music in concert rooms, went to the Law Courts, and saw new plays. No one dined out without asking her partner certain questions and carefully noting his replies. At intervals we met together and compared our observations. Oh, those were merry meeting! Never have I laughed so much as I did when Rose read her notes upon "Honour" and described how she had dressed herself as an Ethiopian Prince and gone aboard one of His Majesty's ships. Discovering the hoax, the Captain visited her (now disguised as a private gentleman) and demanded that honour should be satisfied. "But how?" she asked. "How?" he bellowed. "With the cane of course!" Seeing that he was beside himself with rage and expecting that her last moment had come, she bent over and received, to her amazement, six light taps upon the behind. "The honour of the British Navy is avenged!" he cried, and, raising herself, she saw him with the sweat pouring down his face holding out a trembling right hand. "Away!" she exclaimed, striking an attitude and imitating the ferocity of his own expression, "My honour has still to be satisfied!" "Spoken like a gentleman!" he returned, and fell into profound thought. "If six strokes avenge the honour of the King's Navy," he mused, "how many avenge the honour of a private gentleman?" He said he would prefer to lay the case before his brother officers. She replied haughtily that she could not wait. He praised her sensibility. "Let me see," he cried suddenly, "did your father keep a carriage?" "No," she said. "Or a riding horse?" "We had a donkey," she bethought her, "which drew the mowing machine." At this his face lighted. "My mother's name-" she added. "For God's sake, man, don't mention your mother's name!" he shrieked, trembling like an aspen and flushing to the roots of his hair, and it was ten minutes at least before she could induce him to proceed. At length he decreed that if she gave him four strokes and a half in the small of the back at a spot indicated by himself (the half conceded, he said, in recognition of the fact that her great grandmother's uncle was killed at Trafalgar) it was his opinion that her honour would be as good as new. This was done; they retired to a restaurant; drank two bottles of wine for which he insisted upon paying; and parted with protestations of eternal friendship.

Then we had Fanny's account of her visit to the Law Courts. At her first visit she had come to the conclusion that the Judges were either made of wood or were impersonated by large animals resembling man who had been trained to move with extreme dignity, mumble and nod their heads. To test her theory she had liberated a handkerchief of bluebottles at the critical moment of a trial, but was unable to judge whether the creatures gave signs of humanity for the buzzing of the flies induced so sound a sleep that she only woke in time to see the prisoners led into the cells below. But from the evidence she brought we voted that it is unfair to suppose that the Judges are men.

Helen went to the Royal Academy, but when asked to deliver her report upon the pictures she began to recite from a pale blue volume, "O! for the touch of a vanished hand and the sound of a voice that is still. Home is the hunter, home from the hill. He gave his bridle reins a shake. Love is sweet, love is brief. Spring, the fair spring, is the year's pleasant King. O! to be in England now that April's there. Men must work and women must weep. The path of duty is the way to glory-" We could listen to no more of this gibberish.

"We want no more poetry!" we cried.

"Daughters of England!" she began, but here we pulled her down, a vase of water getting spilt over her in the scuffle.

"Thank God!" she exclaimed, shaking herself like a dog. "Now I'll roll on the carpet and see if I can't brush off what remains of the Union Jack. Then perhaps-" here she rolled energetically. Getting up she began to explain to us what modern pictures are like when Castalia stopped her.

"What is the average size of a picture?" she asked. "Perhaps two feet by two and a half," she said. Castalia made notes while Helen spoke, and when she had done, and we were trying not to meet each other's eyes, rose and said, "At your wish I spent last week at Oxbridge, disguised as a charwoman. I thus had access to the rooms of several Professors and will now attempt to give you some idea-only," she broke off, "I can't think how to do it. It's all so queer. These Professors," she went on, "live in large houses built round grass plots each in a kind of cell by himself. Yet they have every convenience and comfort. You have only to press a button or light a little lamp. Theirs papers are beautifully filed. Books abound. There are no children or animals, save half a dozen stray cats and one aged bullfinch-a cock. I remember," she broke off, "an Aunt of mine who lived at Dulwich and kept cactuses. You reached the conservatory through the double drawing-room, and there, on the hot pipes, were dozens of them, ugly, squat, bristly little plants each in a separate pot. Once in a hundred years the Aloe flowered, so my Aunt said. But she died before that happened-" We told her to keep to the point. "Well," she resumed, "when Professor Hobkin was out, I examined his life work, an edition of Sappho. It's a queer looking book, six or seven inches thick, not all by Sappho. Oh, no. Most of it is a defence of Sappho's chastity, which some German had denied, add I can assure you the passion with which these two gentlemen argued, the learning they displayed, the prodigious ingenuity with which they disputed the use of some implement which looked to me for all the world like a hairpin astounded me; especially when the door opened and Professor Hobkin himself appeared. A very nice, mild, old gentleman, but what could he know about chastity?" We misunderstood her.

"No, no," she protested, "he's the soul of honour I'm sure-not that he resembled Rose's sea captain in the least. I was thinking rather of my Aunt's cactuses. What could they know about chastity?"

Again we told her not to wander from the point,-did the Oxbridge professors help to produce good people and good books?-the objects of life.

"There!" she exclaimed. "It never struck me to ask. It never occurred to me that they could possibly produce anything."

"I believe," said Sue, "that you made some mistake. Probably Professor Hobkin was a gynecologist. A scholar is a very different sort of man. A scholar is overflowing with humour and invention-perhaps addicted to wine, but what of that?-a delightful companion, generous, subtle, imaginative-as stands to reason. For he spends his life in company with the finest human beings that have ever existed."

"Hum," said Castalia. "Perhaps I'd better go back and try again."

Some three months later it happened that I was sitting alone when Castalia entered. I don't know what it was in the look of her that so moved me; but I could not restrain myself, and, dashing across the room, I clasped her in my arms. Not only was she very beautiful; she seemed also in the highest spirits. "How happy you look!" I exclaimed, as she sat down.

"I've been at Oxbridge," she said.

"Asking questions?"

"Answering them," she replied.

"You have not broken our vows?" I said anxiously, noticing something about her figure.

"Oh, the vow," she said casually. "I'm going to have a baby, if that's what you mean. You can't imagine," she burst out, "how exciting, how beautiful, how satisfying-"

"What is?" I asked.

"To-to-answer questions," she replied in some confusion. Whereupon she told me the whole of her story. But in the middle of an account which interested and excited me more than anything I had ever heard, she gave the strangest cry, half whoop, half holloa-

"Chastity! Chastity! Where's my chastity!" she cried. "Help Ho! The scent bottle!"

There was nothing in the room but a cruet containing mustard, which I was about to administer when she recovered her composure.

"You should have thought of that three months ago," I said severely.

"True," she replied. "There's not much good in thinking of it now. It was unfortunate, by the way, that my mother had me called Castalia."

"Oh, Castalia, your mother-" I was beginning when she reached for the mustard pot.

"No, no, no," she said, shaking her head. "If you'd been a chaste woman yourself you would have screamed at the sight of me-instead of which you rushed across the room and took me in your arms. No, Cassandra. We are neither of us chaste." So we went on talking.

Meanwhile the room was filling up, for it was the day appointed to discuss the results of our observations. Everyone, I thought, felt as I did about Castalia. They kissed her and said how glad they were to see her again. At length, when we were all assembled, Jane rose and said that it was time to begin. She began by saying that we had now asked questions for over five years, and that though the results were bound to be inconclusive-here Castalia nudged me and whispered that she was not so sure about that. Then she got up, and, interrupting Jane in the middle of a sentence, said:

"Before you say any more, I want to know-am I to stay in the room? Because," she added, "I have to confess that I am an impure woman."

Everyone looked at her in astonishment.

"You are going to have a baby?" asked Jane.

She nodded her head.

It was extraordinary to see the different expressions on their faces. A sort of hum went through the room, in which I could catch the words "impure," "baby," "Castalia," and so on. Jane, who was herself considerably moved, put it to us:

"Shall she go? Is she impure?"

Such a roar filled the room as might have been heard in the street outside.

"No! No! No! Let her stay! Impure? Fiddlesticks!" Yet I fancied that some of the youngest, girls of nineteen or twenty, held back as if overcome with shyness. Then we all came about her and began asking questions, and at last I saw one of the youngest, who had kept in the background, approach shyly and say to her:

"What is chastity then? I mean is it good, or is it bad, or is it nothing at all?" She replied so low that I could not catch what she said.

"You know I was shocked," said another, "for at least ten minutes."

"In my opinion," said Poll, who was growing crusty from always reading in the London Library, "chastity is nothing but ignorance-a most discreditable state of mind. We should admit only the unchaste to our society. I vote that Castalia shall be our President."

This was violently disputed.

"It is as unfair to brand women with chastity as with unchastity," said Poll. "Some of us haven't the opportunity either. Moreover, I don't believe Cassy herself maintains that she acted as she did from a pure love of knowledge."

"He is only twenty-one and divinely beautiful," said Cassy, with a ravishing gesture.

"I move," said Helen, "that no one be allowed to talk of chastity or unchastity save those who are in love."

"Oh, bother," said Judith, who had been enquiring into scientific matters, "I'm not in love and I'm longing to explain my measures for dispensing with prostitutes and fertilizing virgins by Act of Parliament."

She went on to tell us of an invention of hers to be erected at Tube stations and other public resorts, which, upon payment of a small fee, would safeguard the nation's health, accommodate its sons, and relieve its daughters. Then she had contrived a method of preserving in sealed tubes the germs of future Lord Chancellors "or poets or painters or musicians," she went on, "supposing, that is to say, that these breeds are not extinct, and that women still wish to bear children-"

"Of course we wish to bear children!" cried Castalia, impatiently. Jane rapped the table.

"That is the very point we are met to consider," she said. "For five years we have been trying to find out whether we are justified in continuing the human race. Castalia has anticipated our decision. But it remains for the rest of us to make up our minds."

Here one after another of our messengers rose and delivered their reports. The marvels of civilisation far exceeded our expectations, and, as we learnt for the first time how man flies in the air, talks across space, penetrates to the heart of an atom, and embraces the universe in his speculations, a murmur of admiration burst from our lips.

"We are proud," we cried, "that our mothers sacrificed their youth in such a cause as this!" Castalia, who had been listening intently, looked prouder than all the rest. Then Jane reminded us that we had still much to learn, and Castalia begged us to make haste. On we went through a vast tangle of statistics. We learnt that England has a population of so many millions, and that such and such a proportion of them is constantly hungry and in prison; that the average size of a working man's family is such, and that so great a percentage of women die from maladies incident to childbirth. Reports were read of visits to factories, shops, slums, and dockyards. Descriptions were given of the Stock Exchange, of a gigantic house of business in the City, and of a Government Office. The British Colonies were now discussed, and some account was given of our rule in India, Africa and Ireland. I was sitting by Castalia and I noticed her uneasiness.

"We shall never come to any conclusion at all at this rate," she said. "As it appears that civilisation is so much more complex than we had any notion, would it not be better to confine ourselves to our original enquiry? We agreed that it was the object of life to produce good people and good books. All this time we have been talking of aeroplanes, factories, and money. Let us talk about men themselves and their arts, for that is the heart of the matter."

So the diners out stepped forward with long slips of paper containing answers to their questions. These had been framed after much consideration. A good man, we had agreed, must at any rate be honest, passionate, and unworldly. But whether or not a particular man possessed those qualities could only be discovered by asking questions, often beginning at a remote distance from the centre. Is Kensington a nice place to live in? Where is your son being educated-and your daughter? Now please tell me, what do you pay for your cigars? By the way, is Sir Joseph a baronet or only a knight? Often it seemed that we learnt more from trivial questions of this kind than from more direct ones. "I accepted my peerage," said Lord Bunkum, "because my wife wished it." I forget how many titles were accepted for the same reason. "Working fifteen hours out of the twenty-four, as I do-" ten thousand professional men began.

"No, no, of course you can neither read nor write. But why do you work so hard?" "My dear lady, with a growing family-" "But why does your family grow?" Their wives wished that too, or perhaps it was the British Empire. But more significant than the answers were the refusals to answer. Very few would reply at all to questions about morality and religion, and such answers as were given were not serious. Questions as to the value of money and power were almost invariably brushed aside, or pressed at extreme risk to the asker. "I'm sure," said Jill, "that if Sir Harley Tightboots hadn't been carving the mutton when I asked him about the capitalist system he would have cut my throat. The only reason why we escaped with our lives over and over again is that men are at once so hungry and so chivalrous. They despise us too much to mind what we say."

"Of course they despise us," said Eleanor. "At the same time how do you account for this-I made enquiries among the artists. Now, no woman has ever been an artist, has she, Polls?"

"Jane-Austen-Charlotte-Bronte-George-Eliot," cried Poll, like a man crying muffins in a back street.

"Damn the woman!" someone exclaimed. "What a bore she is!"

"Since Sappho there has been no female of first rate-" Eleanor began, quoting from a weekly newspaper.

"It's now well known that Sappho was the somewhat lewd invention of Professor Hobkin," Ruth interrupted.

"Anyhow, there is no reason to suppose that any woman ever has been able to write or ever will be able to write," Eleanor continued. "And yet, whenever I go among authors they never cease to talk to me about their books. Masterly! I say, or Shakespeare himself! (for one must say something) and I assure you, they believe me."

"That proves nothing," said Jane. "They all do it. Only," she sighed, "it doesn't seem to help us much. Perhaps we had better examine modern literature next. Liz, it's your turn."

Elizabeth rose and said that in order to prosecute her enquiry she had dressed as a man and been taken for a reviewer.

"I have read new books pretty steadily for the past five years," said she. "Mr. Wells is the most popular living writer; then comes Mr. Arnold Bennett; then Mr. Compton Makenzie; Mr. McKenna and Mr. Walpole may be bracketed together." She sat down.

"But you've told us nothing!" we expostulated. "Or do you mean that these gentlemen have greatly surpassed Jane-Elliot and that English fiction is-where's that review of yours? Oh, yes, 'safe in their hands.'"

"Safe, quite safe," she said, shifting uneasily from foot to foot. "And I'm sure that they give away even more than they receive."

We were all sure of that. "But," we pressed her, "do they write good books?"

"Good books?" she said, looking at the ceiling "You must remember," she began, speaking with extreme rapidity, "that fiction is the mirror of life. And you can't deny that education is of the highest importance, and that it would be extremely annoying, if you found yourself alone at Brighton late at night, not to know which was the best boarding house to stay at, and suppose it was a dripping Sunday evening-wouldn't it be nice to go to the Movies?"

"But what has that got to do with it?" we asked.

"Nothing-nothing-nothing whatever," she replied.

"Well, tell us the truth," we bade her.

"The truth? But isn't it wonderful," she broke off-"Mr. Chitter has written a weekly article for the past thirty years upon love or hot buttered toast and has sent all his sons to Eton-"

"The truth!" we demanded.

"Oh, the truth," she stammered, "the truth has nothing to do with literature," and sitting down she refused to say another word.

It all seemed to us very inconclusive.

"Ladies, we must try to sum up the results," Jane was beginning, when a hum, which had been heard for some time through the open window, drowned her voice.

"War! War! War! Declaration of War!" men were shouting in the street below.

We looked at each other in horror.

"What war?" we cried. "What war?" We remembered, too late, that we had never thought of sending anyone to the House of Commons. We had forgotten all about it. We turned to Poll, who had reached the history shelves in the London Library, and asked her to enlighten us.

"Why," we cried, "do men go to war?"

"Sometimes for one reason, sometimes for another," she replied calmly. "In 1760, for example-" The shouts outside drowned her words. "Again in 1797-in 1804-It was the Austrians in 1866-1870 was the Franco-Prussian-In 1900 on the other hand-"

"But it's now 1914!" we cut her short.

"Ah, I don't know what they're going to war for now," she admitted.

* * * * *

The war was over and peace was in process of being signed, when I once more found myself with Castalia in the room where our meetings used to be held. We began idly turning over the pages of our old minute books. "Queer," I mused, "to see what we were thinking five years ago." "We are agreed," Castalia quoted, reading over my shoulder, "that it is the object of life to produce good people and good books." We made no comment upon that. "A good man is at any rate honest, passionate and unworldly." "What a woman's language!" I observed. "Oh, dear," cried Castalia, pushing the book away from her, "what fools we were! It was all Poll's father's fault," she went on. "I believe he did it on purpose-that ridiculous will, I mean, forcing Poll to read all the books in the London Library. If we hadn't learnt to read," she said bitterly, "we might still have been bearing children in ignorance and that I believe was the happiest life after all. I know what you're going to say about war," she checked me, "and the horror of bearing children to see them killed, but our mothers did it, and their mothers, and their mothers before them. And they didn't complain. They couldn't read. I've done my best," she sighed, "to prevent my little girl from learning to read, but what's the use? I caught Ann only yesterday with a newspaper in her hand and she was beginning to ask me if it was 'true.' Next she'll ask me whether Mr. Lloyd George is a good man, then whether Mr. Arnold Bennett is a good novelist, and finally whether I believe in God. How can I bring my daughter up to believe in nothing?" she demanded.

"Surely you could teach her to believe that a man's intellect is, and always will be, fundamentally superior to a woman's?" I suggested. She brightened at this and began to turn over our old minutes again. "Yes," she said, "think of their discoveries, their mathematics, their science, their philosophy, their scholarship-" and then she began to laugh, "I shall never forget old Hobkin and the hairpin," she said, and went on reading and laughing and I thought she was quite happy, when suddenly she drew the book from her and burst out, "Oh, Cassandra, why do you torment me? Don't you know that our belief in man's intellect is the greatest fallacy of them all?" "What?" I exclaimed. "Ask any journalist, schoolmaster, politician or public house keeper in the land and they will all tell you that men are much cleverer than women." "As if I doubted it," she said scornfully. "How could they help it? Haven't we bred them and fed and kept them in comfort since the beginning of time so that they may be clever even if they're nothing else? It's all our doing!" she cried. "We insisted upon having intellect and now we've got it. And it's intellect," she continued, "that's at the bottom of it. What could be more charming than a boy before he has begun to cultivate his intellect? He is beautiful to look at; he gives himself no airs; he understands the meaning of art and literature instinctively; he goes about enjoying his life and making other people enjoy theirs. Then they teach him to cultivate his intellect. He becomes a barrister, a civil servant, a general, an author, a professor. Every day he goes to an office. Every year he produces a book. He maintains a whole family by the products of his brain-poor devil! Soon he cannot come into a room without making us all feel uncomfortable; he condescends to every woman he meets, and dares not tell the truth even to his own wife; instead of rejoicing our eyes we have to shut them if we are to take him in our arms. True, they console themselves with stars of all shapes, ribbons of all shades, and incomes of all sizes-but what is to console us? That we shall be able in ten years' time to spend a weekend at Lahore? Or that the least insect in Japan has a name twice the length of its body? Oh, Cassandra, for Heaven's sake let us devise a method by which men may bear children! It is our only chance. For unless we provide them with some innocent occupation we shall get neither good people nor good books; we shall perish beneath the fruits of their unbridled activity; and not a human being will survive to know that there once was Shakespeare!"

"It is too late," I replied. "We cannot provide even for the children that we have."

"And then you ask me to believe in intellect," she said.

While we spoke, man were crying hoarsely and wearily in the street, and, listening, we heard that the Treaty of Peace had just been signed. The voices died away. The rain was falling and interfered no doubt with the proper explosion of the fireworks.

"My cook will have bought the Evening News," said Castalia, "and Ann will be spelling it out over her tea. I must go home."

"It's no good-not a bit of good," I said. "Once she knows how to read there's only one thing you can teach her to believe in-and that is herself."

"Well, that would be a change," sighed Castalia.

So we swept up the papers of our Society, and, though Ann was playing with her doll very happily, we solemnly made her a present of the lot and told her we had chosen her to be President of the Society of the future-upon which she burst into tears, poor little girl.

1921




BLUE AND GREEN





GREEN


The ported fingers of glass hang downwards. The light slides down the glass, and drops a pool of green. All day long the ten fingers of the lustre drop green upon the marble. The feathers of parakeets-their harsh cries-sharp blades of palm trees-green, too; green needles glittering in the sun. But the hard glass drips on to the marble; the pools hover above the dessert sand; the camels lurch through them; the pools settle on the marble; rushes edge them; weeds clog them; here and there a white blossom; the frog flops over; at night the stars are set there unbroken. Evening comes, and the shadow sweeps the green over the mantelpiece; the ruffled surface of ocean. No ships come; the aimless waves sway beneath the empty sky. It's night; the needles drip blots of blue. The green's out.




BLUE


The snub-nosed monster rises to the surface and spouts through his blunt nostrils two columns of water, which, fiery-white in the centre, spray off into a fringe of blue beads. Strokes of blue line the black tarpaulin of his hide. Slushing the water through mouth and nostrils he sings, heavy with water, and the blue closes over him dowsing the polished pebbles of his eyes. Thrown upon the beach he lies, blunt, obtuse, shedding dry blue scales. Their metallic blue stains the rusty iron on the beach. Blue are the ribs of the wrecked rowing boat. A wave rolls beneath the blue bells. But the cathedral's different, cold, incense laden, faint blue with the veils of madonnas.

1921




IN THE ORCHARD


Miranda slept in the orchard, lying in a long chair beneath the apple tree. Her book had fallen into the grass, and her finger still seemed to point at the sentence 'Ce pays est vraiment un des coins du monde oui le rire des filles elate le mieux . . .' as if she had fallen asleep just there. The opals on her finger flushed green, flushed rosy, and again flushed orange as the sun, oozing through the apple-trees, filled them. Then, when the breeze blew, her purple dress rippled like a flower attached to a stalk; the grasses nodded; and the white butterfly came blowing this way and that just above her face.

Four feet in the air over her head the apples hung. Suddenly there was a shrill clamour as if they were gongs of cracked brass beaten violently, irregularly, and brutally. It was only the school-children saying the multiplication table in unison, stopped by the teacher, scolded, and beginning to say the multiplication table over again. But this clamour passed four feet above Miranda's head, went through the apple boughs, and, striking against the cowman's little boy who was picking blackberries in the hedge when he should have been at school, made him tear his thumb on the thorns.

Next there was a solitary cry-sad, human, brutal. Old Parsley was, indeed, blind drunk.

Then the very topmost leaves of the apple-tree, flat like little fish against the blue, thirty feet above the earth, chimed with a pensive and lugubrious note. It was the organ in the church playing one of Hymns Ancient and Modern. The sound floated out and was cut into atoms by a flock of field-fares flying at an enormous speed-somewhere or other. Miranda lay asleep thirty feet beneath.

Then above the apple-tree and the pear-tree two hundred feet above Miranda lying asleep in the orchard bells thudded, intermittent, sullen, didactic, for six poor women of the parish were being churched and the Rector was returning thanks to heaven.

And above that with a sharp squeak the golden feather of the church tower turned from south to east. The wind changed. Above everything else it droned, above the woods, the meadows, the hills, miles above Miranda lying in the orchard asleep. It swept on, eyeless, brainless, meeting nothing that could stand against it, until, wheeling the other way, it turned south again. Miles below, in a space as big as the eye of a needle, Miranda stood upright and cried aloud: 'Oh, I shall be late for tea!'



Miranda slept in the orchard-or perhaps she was not asleep, for her lips moved very slightly as if they were saying, 'Ce pays est vraiment un des coins du monde . . . oui le rire des filles . . . eclate . . . eclate . . . eclate .'and then she smiled and let her body sink all its weight on to the enormous earth which rises, she thought, to carry me on its back as if I were a leaf, or a queen (here the children said the multiplication table), or, Miranda went on, I might be lying on the top of a cliff with the gulls screaming above me. The higher they fly, she continued, as the teacher scolded the children and rapped Jimmy over the knuckles till they bled, the deeper they look into the sea-into the sea, she repeated, and her fingers relaxed and her lips closed gently as if she were floating on the sea, and then, when the shout of the drunken man sounded overhead, she drew breath with an extraordinary ecstasy, for she thought that she heard life itself crying out from a rough tongue in a scarlet mouth, from the wind, from the bells, from the curved green leaves of the cabbages.

Naturally she was being married when the organ played the tune from Hymns Ancient and Modern, and, when the bells rang after the six poor women had been churched, the sullen intermittent thud made her think that the very earth shook with the hoofs of the horse that was galloping towards her ('Ah, I have only to wait!' she sighed), and it seemed to her that everything had already begun moving, crying, riding, flying round her, across her, towards her in a pattern.

Mary is chopping the wood, she thought; Pearman is herding the cows; the carts are coming up from the meadows; the rider-and she traced out the lines that the men, the carts, the birds, and the rider made over the countryside until they all seemed driven out, round, and across by the beat of her own heart.

Miles up in the air the wind changed; the golden feather of the church tower squeaked; and Miranda jumped up and cried: 'Oh, I shall be late for tea!'



Miranda slept in the orchard, or was she asleep or was she not asleep? Her purple dress stretched between the two apple-trees. There were twenty-four apple-trees in the orchard, some slanting slightly, others growing straight with a rush up the trunk which spread wide into branches and formed into round red or yellow drops. Each apple-tree had sufficient space. The sky exactly fitted the leaves. When the breeze blew, the line of the boughs against the wall slanted slightly and then returned. A wagtail flew diagonally from one corner to another. Cautiously hopping, a thrush advanced towards a fallen apple; from the other wall a sparrow fluttered just above the grass. The uprush of the trees was tied down by these movements; the whole was compacted by the orchard walls. For miles beneath the earth was clamped together; rippled on the surface with wavering air; and across the corner of the orchard the blue-green was slit by a purple streak. The wind changing, one bunch of apples was tossed so high that it blotted out two cows in the meadow ('Oh, I shall be late for tea!' cried Miranda), and the apples hung straight across the wall again.

1923




MRS DALLOWAY IN BOND STREET


Mrs Dalloway said she would buy the gloves herself.

Big Ben was striking as she stepped out into the street. It was eleven o'clock and the unused hour was fresh as if issued to children on a beach. But there was something solemn in the deliberate swing of the repeated strokes; something stirring in the murmur of wheels and the shuffle of footsteps.

No doubt they were not all bound on errands of happiness. There is much more to be said about us than that we walk the streets of Westminster. Big Ben too is nothing but steel rods consumed by rust were it not for the care of H.M.'s Office of Works. Only for Mrs Dalloway the moment was complete; for Mrs Dalloway June was fresh. A happy childhood-and it was not to his daughters only that Justin Parry had seemed a fine fellow (weak of course on the Bench); flowers at evening, smoke rising; the caw of rooks falling from ever so high, down down through the October air  there is nothing to take the place of childhood. A leaf of mint brings it back: or a cup with a blue ring.

Poor little wretches, she sighed, and pressed forward. Oh, right under the horses' noses, you little demon! and there she was left on the kerb stretching her hand out, while Jimmy Dawes grinned on the further side.

A charming woman, poised, eager, strangely white-haired for her pink cheeks, so Scope Purvis, C.C.B., saw her as he hurried to his office. She stiffened a little, waiting for burthen's van to pass. Big Ben struck the tenth; struck the eleventh stroke. The leaden circles dissolved in the air. Pride held her erect, inheriting, handing on, acquainted with discipline and with suffering. How people suffered, how they suffered, she thought, thinking of Mrs Foxcroft at the Embassy last night decked with jewels, eating her heart out, because that nice boy was dead, and now the old Manor House (Durtnall's van passed) must go to a cousin.

'Good morning to you!' said Hugh Whitbread raising his hat rather extravagantly by the china shop, for they had known each other as children. 'Where are you off to?'

'I love walking in London,' said Mrs Dalloway. 'Really it's better than walking in the country!'

'We've just come up,' said Hugh Whitbread. 'Unfortunately to see doctors.'

'Milly?' said Mrs Dalloway, instantly compassionate.

'Out of sorts,' said Hugh Whitbread. 'That sort of thing. Dick all right?'

'First rate!' said Clarissa.

Of course, she thought, walking on, Milly is about my age-fifty, fifty-two. So it is probably that, Hugh's manner had said so, said it perfectly-dear old Hugh, thought Mrs Dalloway, remembering with amusement, with gratitude, with emotion, how shy, like a brother-one would rather die than speak to one's brother-Hugh had always been, when he was at Oxford, and came over, and perhaps one of them (drat the thing!) couldn't ride. How then could women sit in Parliament? How could they do things with men? For there is this extra-ordinarily deep instinct, something inside one; you can't get over it; it's no use trying; and men like Hugh respect it without our saying it, which is what one loves, thought Clarissa, in dear old Hugh.

She had passed through the Admiralty Arch and saw at the end of the empty road with its thin trees Victoria's white mound, Victoria's billowing motherliness, amplitude and homeliness, always ridiculous, yet how sublime, thought Mrs Dalloway, remembering Kensington Gardens and the old lady in horn spectacles and being told by Nanny to stop dead still and bow to the Queen. The flag flew above the Palace. The King and Queen were back then. Dick had met her at lunch the other day-a thoroughly nice woman. It matters so much to the poor, thought Clarissa, and to the soldiers. A man in bronze stood heroically on a pedestal with a gun on her left hand side-the South African war. It matters, thought Mrs Dalloway walking towards Buckingham Palace. There it stood four-square, in the broad sunshine, uncompromising, plain. But it was character, she thought; something inborn in the race; what Indians respected. The Queen went to hospitals, opened bazaars-the Queen of England, thought Clarissa, looking at the Palace. Already at this hour a motor car passed out at the gates; soldiers saluted; the gates were shut. And Clarissa, crossing the road, entered the Park, holding herself upright.

June had drawn out every leaf on the trees. The mothers of Westminster with mottled breasts gave suck to their young. Quite respectable girls lay stretched on the grass. An elderly man, stooping very stiffly, picked up a crumpled paper, spread it out flat and flung it away. How horrible! Last night at the Embassy Sir Dighton had said, 'If 1 want a fellow to hold my horse, I have only to put up my hand.' But the religious question is far more serious than the economic, Sir Dighton had said, which she thought extraordinarily interesting, from a man like Sir Dighton. 'Oh, the country will never know what it has lost,' he had said, talking of his own accord, about dear Jack Stewart.

She mounted the little hill lightly. The air stirred with energy. Messages were passing from the Fleet to the Admiralty. Piccadilly and Arlington Street and the Mall seemed to chafe the very air in the Park and lift its leaves hotly, brilliantly, upon waves of that divine vitality which Clarissa loved. To ride; to dance; she had adored all that. Or going long walks in the country, talking, about books, what to do with one's life, for young people were amazingly priggish-oh, the things one had said! But one had conviction. Middle age is the devil. People like Jack'll never know that, she thought; for he never once thought of death, never, they said, knew he was dying. And now can never mourn-how did it go?-a head grown grey . . . From the contagion of the world's slow stain, . . . have drunk their cup a round or two before. . . . From the contagion of the world's slow stain! She held herself upright.

But how jack would have shouted! Quoting Shelley, in Piccadilly, 'You want a pin,' he would have said. He hated frumps. 'My God Clarissa! My God Clarissa!'-she could hear him now at the Devonshire House party, about poor Sylvia Hunt in her amber necklace and that dowdy old silk. Clarissa held herself upright for she had spoken aloud and now she was in Piccadilly, passing the house with the slender green columns, and the balconies; passing club windows full of newspapers; passing old Lady Burdett-Coutts' house where the glazed white parrot used to hang; and Devonshire House, without its gilt leopards; and Claridge's, where she must remember Dick wanted her to leave a card on Mrs Jepson or she would be gone. Rich Americans can be very charming. There was St James's Palace; like a child's game with bricks; and now-she had passed Bond Street-she was by Hatchard's book shop. The stream was endless-endless endless. Lords, Ascot, Hurlingham-what was it? What a duck, she thought, looking at the frontispiece of some book of memoirs spread wide in the bow window, Sir Joshua perhaps or Romney; arch, bright, demure; the sort of girl-like her own Elizabeth-the only real sort of girl. And there was that absurd book, Soapy Sponge, which Jim used to quote by the yard; and Shakespeare's Sonnets. She knew them by heart. Phil and she had argued all day about the Dark Lady, and Dick had said straight out at dinner that night that he had never heard of her. Really, she had married him for that! He had never read Shakespeare! There must be some little cheap book she could buy for Milly-Cranford of course! Was there ever anything so enchanting as the cow in petticoats? If only people had that sort of humour, that sort of self-respect now, thought Clarissa, for she remembered the broad pages; the sentences ending; the characters-how one talked about them as if they were real. For all the great things one must go to the past, she thought. From the contagion of the world's slow stain . . . Fear no more the heat o' the sun. . . . And now can never mourn, can never mourn, she repeated, her eyes straying over the window; for it ran in her head; the test of great poetry; the moderns had never written anything one wanted to read about death, she thought; and turned.

Omnibuses joined motor cars; motor cars vans; vans taxicabs, taxicabs motor cars-here was an open motor car with a girl, alone. Up till four, her feet tingling, I know, thought Clarissa, for the girl looked washed out, half asleep, in the corner of the car after the dance. And another car came; and another. No! No! No! Clarissa smiled good-naturedly. The fat lady had taken every sort of trouble, but diamonds! orchids! at this hour of the morning! No! No! No! The excellent policeman would, when the time came, hold up his hand. Another motor car passed. How utterly unattractive! Why should a girl of that age paint black round her eyes? And a young man, with a girl, at this hour, when the country The admirable policeman raised his hand and Clarissa acknowledging his sway, taking her time, crossed, walked towards Bond Street; saw the narrow crooked street, the yellow banners; the thick notched telegraph wires stretched across the sky.

A hundred years ago her great-great-grandfather, Seymour Parry, who ran away with Conway's daughter, had walked down Bond Street. Down Bond Street the Parrys had walked for a hundred years, and might have met the Dalloways (Leighs on the mother's side) going up. Her father got his clothes from Hill's. There was a roll of cloth in the window, and here just one jar on a black table, incredibly expensive; like the thick pink salmon on the ice block at the fish monger's. The jewels were exquisite-pink and orange stars, paste, Spanish, she thought, and chains of old gold; starry buckles, little brooches which had been worn on sea-green satin by ladies with high head-dresses. But no good looking! One must economise. She must go on past the picture dealer's where one of the odd French pictures hung, as if people had thrown confetti-pink and blue-for a joke. If you had lived with pictures (and it's the same with books and music) thought Clarissa, passing the Aeolian Hall, you can't be taken in by a joke.

The river of Bond Street was clogged. There, like a Queen at a tournament, raised, regal, was Lady Bexborough. She sat in her carriage, upright, alone, looking through her glasses. The white glove was loose at her wrist. She was in black, quite shabby, yet, thought Clarissa, how extraordinarily it tells, breeding, self-respect, never saying a word too much or letting people gossip; an astonishing friend; no one can pick a hole in her after all these years, and now, there she is, thought Clarissa, passing the Countess who waited powdered, perfectly still, and Clarissa would have given anything to be like that, the mistress of Clarefield, talking politics, like a man. But she never goes anywhere, thought Clarissa, and it's quite useless to ask her, and the carriage went on and Lady Bexborough was borne past like a Queen at a tournament, though she had nothing to live for and the old man is failing and they say she is sick of it all, thought Clarissa and the tears actually rose to her eyes as she entered the shop.

'Good morning,' said Clarissa in her charming voice. 'Gloves,' she said with her exquisite friendliness and putting her bag on the counter began, very slowly, to undo the buttons. 'White gloves,' she said. 'Above the elbow,' and she looked straight into the shop-woman's face-but this was not the girl she remembered? She looked quite old. 'These really don't fit,' said Clarissa. The shop-girl looked at them. 'Madame wears bracelets?' Clarissa spread out her fingers. 'Perhaps it's my rings.' And the girl took the grey gloves with her to the end of the counter.

Yes, thought Clarissa, if it's the girl I remember, she's twenty years older. . .. There was only one other customer, sitting sideways at the counter, her elbow poised, her bare hand drooping, vacant; like a figure on a Japanese fan, thought Clarissa, too vacant perhaps, yet some men would adore her. The lady shook her head sadly. Again the gloves were too large. She turned round the glass. 'Above the wrist,' she reproached the grey-headed woman; who looked and agreed.

They waited; a clock ticked; Bond Street hummed, dulled, distant; the woman went away holding gloves. 'Above the wrist,' said the lady, mournfully, raising her voice. And she would have to order chairs, ices, flowers, and cloak-room tickets, thought Clarissa. The people she didn't want would come; the others wouldn't. She would stand by the door. They sold stockings-silk stockings. A lady is known by her gloves and her shoes, old Uncle William used to say. And through the hanging silk stockings quivering silver she looked at the lady, sloping shouldered, her hand drooping, her bag slipping, her eyes vacantly on the floor. It would be intolerable if dowdy women came to her party! Would one have liked Keats if he had worn red socks? Oh, at last-she drew into the counter and it flashed into her mind:

'Do you remember before the war you had gloves with pearl buttons?'

'French gloves, Madame?'

'Yes, they were French,' said Clarissa. The other lady rose very sadly and took her bag, and looked at the gloves on the counter. But they were all too large-always too large at the wrist.

'With pearl buttons,' said the shop-girl, who looked ever so much older. She split the lengths of tissue paper apart on the counter. With pearl buttons, thought Clarissa, perfectly simple-how French!

'Madame's hands are so slender,' said the shop-girl, drawing the glove firmly, smoothly, down over her rings. And Clarissa looked at her arm in the looking-glass. The glove hardly came to the elbow. Were there others half an inch longer? Still it seemed tiresome to bother her perhaps the one day in the month, thought Clarissa, when it's an agony to stand. 'Oh, don't bother,' she said. But the gloves were brought.

'Don't you get fearfully tired,' she said in her charming voice, 'standing? When d'you get your holiday?'

'In September, Madame, when we're not so busy.'

When we're in the country thought Clarissa. Or shooting. She has a fortnight at Brighton. In some stuffy lodging. The landlady takes the sugar. Nothing would be easier than to send her to Mrs Lumley's right in the country (and it was on the tip of her tongue). But then she remembered how on their honeymoon Dick had shown her the folly of giving impulsively. It was much more important, he said, to get trade with China. Of course he was right. And she could feel the girl wouldn't like to be given things. There she was in her place. So was Dick. Selling gloves was her job. She had her own sorrows quite separate, 'and now can never mourn, can never mourn,' the words ran in her head. 'From the contagion of the world's slow stain,' thought Clarissa holding her arm stiff, for there are moments when it seems utterly futile (the glove was drawn off leaving her arm flecked with powder)-simply one doesn't believe, thought Clarissa, any more in God.

The traffic suddenly roared; the silk stockings brightened. A customer came in.

'White gloves,' she said, with some ring in her voice that Clarissa remembered.

It used, thought Clarissa, to be so simple. Down down through the air came the caw of the rooks. When Sylvia died, hundreds of years ago, the yew hedges looked so lovely with the diamond webs in the mist before early church. But if Dick were to die tomorrow, as for believing in God-no, she would let the children choose, but for herself, like Lady Bexborough, who opened the bazaar, they say, with the telegram in her hand-Roden, her favourite, killed-she would go on. But why, if one doesn't believe? For the sake of others, she thought, taking the glove in her hand. The girl would be much more unhappy if she didn't believe.

'Thirty shillings,' said the shop-woman. 'No, pardon me Madame, thirty-five. The French gloves are more.'

For one doesn't live for oneself, thought Clarissa.

And then the other customer took a glove, tugged it, and it split.

'There!' she exclaimed .

'A fault of the skin,' said the grey-headed woman hurriedly. 'Sometimes a drop of acid in tanning. Try this pair, Madame.'

'But it's an awful swindle to ask two pound ten!'

Clarissa looked at the lady; the lady looked at Clarissa.

'Gloves have never been quite so reliable since the war,' said the shop-girl, apologising, to Clarissa.

But where had she seen the other lady?-elderly, with a frill under her chin; wearing a black ribbon for gold eyeglasses; sensual, clever, like a Sargent drawing. How one can tell from a voice when people are in the habit, thought Clarissa, of making other people-'It's a shade too tight,' she said-obey. The shop-woman went off again. Clarissa was left waiting. Fear no more she repeated, playing her finger on the counter. Fear no more the heat o' the sun. Fear no more she repeated. There were little brown spots on her arm. And the girl crawled like a snail. Thou thy worldly task hast done. Thousands of young men had died that things might go on. At last! Half an rich above the elbow; pearl buttons; five and a quarter. My dear slow coach, thought Clarissa, do you think I can sit here the whole morning? Now you'll take twenty-five minutes to bring me my change!

There was a violent explosion in the street outside. The shop-women cowered behind the counters. But Clarissa, sitting very upright, smiled at the other lady. 'Miss Anstruther!' she exclaimed.

1923




A WOMAN'S COLLEGE FROM OUTSIDE


The feathery-white moon never let the sky grow dark; all night the chestnut blossoms were white in the green, and dim was the cow-parsley in the meadows. Neither to Tartary nor to Arabia went the wind of the Cambridge courts, but lapsed dreamily in the midst of grey-blue clouds over the roofs of Newnham. There, in the garden, if she needed space to wander, she might find it among the trees; and as none but women's faces could meet her face, she might unveil it blank, featureless, and gaze into rooms where at that hour, blank, featureless, eyelids white over eyes, ringless hands extended upon sheets, slept innumerable women. But here and there a light still burned.

A double light one might figure in Angela's room, seeing how bright Angela herself was, and how bright came back the reflection of herself from the square glass. The whole of her was perfectly delineated-perhaps the soul. For the glass held up an untrembling image-white and gold, red slippers, pale hair with blue stones in it, and never a ripple or shadow to break the smooth kiss of Angela and her reflection in the glass, as if she were glad to be Angela. Anyhow the moment was glad the bright picture hung in the heart of night, the shrine hollowed in the nocturnal blackness. Strange indeed to have this visible proof of the rightness of things; this lily floating flawless upon Time's pool, fearless, as if this were sufficient-this reflection. Which meditation she betrayed by turning, and the mirror held nothing at all, or only the brass bedstead, and she, running here and there, patting, and darting, became like a woman in a house, and changed again, pursing her lips over a black book and marking with her finger what surely could not be a firm grasp of the science of economics. Only Angela Williams was at Newnham for the purpose of earning her living, and could not forget even in moments of impassioned adoration the cheques of her father at Swansea; her mother washing in the scullery: pink frocks out to dry on the line; tokens that even the lily no longer floats flawless upon the pool, but has a name on a card like another.

A. Williams-one may read it in the moonlight; and next to it some Mary or Eleanor, Mildred, Sarah, Phoebe upon square cards on their doors. All names, nothing but names. The cool white light withered them and starched them until it seemed as if the only purpose of all these names was to rise martially in order should there be a call on them to extinguish a fire, suppress an insurrection, or pass an examination. Such is the power of names written upon cards pinned upon doors. Such too the resemblance, what with tiles, corridors, and bedroom doors, to dairy or nunnery, a place of seclusion or discipline, where the bowl of milk stands cool and pure and there's a great washing of linen.

At that very moment soft laughter came from behind a door. A prim-voiced clock struck the hour-one, two. Now if the clock were issuing his commands, they were disregarded. Fire, insurrection, examination, were all snowed under by laughter, or softly uprooted, the sound seeming to bubble up from the depths and gently waft away the hour, rules, discipline. The bed was strewn with cards. Sally was on the floor. Helena in the chair. Good Bertha clasping her hands by the fire-place. A. Williams came in yawning.

'Because it's utterly and intolerably damnable,' said Helena.

'Damnable,' echoed Bertha. Then yawned.

'We're not eunuchs.'

'I saw her slipping in by the back gate with that old hat on. They don't want us to know.'

'They?' said Angela. 'She.'

Then the laughter.

The cards were spread, falling with their red and yellow, faces on the table, and hands were dabbled in the cards. Good Bertha, leaning with her head against the chair, sighed profoundly. For she would willingly have slept, but since night is free pasturage, a limitless field, since night is unmoulded richness, one must tunnel into its darkness. One must hang it with jewels. Night was shared in secret, day browsed on by the whole flock. The blinds were up. A mist was on the garden. Sitting on the floor by the window (while the others played), body, mind, both together, seemed blown through the air, to trail across the bushes. Ah, but she desired to stretch out in bed and to sleep! She believed that no one felt her desire for sleep; she believed humbly-sleepily-with sudden nods and lurchings, that other people were wide awake. When they laughed all together a bird chirped in its sleep out in the garden, as if the laughter. . .

Yes, as if the laughter (for she dozed now) floated out much like mist and attached itself by soft elastic shreds to plants and bushes, so that the garden was vaporous and clouded. And then, swept by the wind, the bushes would bow themselves and the white vapour blow off across the world.

From all the rooms where women slept this vapour issued, attaching itself to shrubs, like mist, and then blew freely out into the open. Elderly women slept, who would on waking immediately clasp the ivory rod of office. Now smooth and colourless, reposing deeply, they lay surrounded, lay supported, by the bodies of youth recumbent or grouped at the window; pouring forth into the garden this bubbling laughter, this irresponsible laughter: this laughter of mind and body floating away rules, hours, discipline: immensely fertilising, yet formless, chaotic, trailing and straying and tufting the rose-bushes with shreds of vapour.

'Ah,' breathed Angela, standing at the window in her night-gown. Pain was in her voice. She leant her head out. The mist was cleft as if her voice parted it. She had been talking, while the others played, to Alice Avery, about Bamborough Castle; the colour of the sands at evening; upon which Alice said she would write and settle the day, in August, and stooping, kissed her, at least touched her head with her hand, and Angela, positively unable to sit still, like one possessed of a wind-lashed sea in her heart, roamed up and down the room (the witness of such a scene) throwing her arms out to relieve this excitement, this astonishment at the incredible stooping of the miraculous tree with the golden fruit at its summit-hadn't it dropped into her arms? She held it glowing to her breast, a thing not to be touched, thought of, or spoken about, but left to glow there. And then, slowly putting there her stockings, there her slippers, folding her petticoat neatly on top, Angela, her other name being Williams, realised-how could she express it?-that after the dark churning of myriad ages here was light at the end of the tunnel; life; the world. Beneath her it lay-all good; all lovable. Such was her discovery.

Indeed, how could one then feel surprise if, lying in bed, she could not close her eyes?-something irresistibly unclosed them-if in the shallow darkness chair and chest of drawers looked stately, and the looking-glass precious with its ashen hint of day? Sucking her thumb like a child (her age nineteen last November), she lay in this good world, this new world, this world at the end of the tunnel, until a desire to see it or forestall it drove her, tossing her blankets, to guide herself to the window, and there, looking out upon the garden, where the mist lay, all the windows open, one fiery-bluish, something murmuring in the distance, the world of course, and the morning coming, 'Oh,' she cried, as if in pain.

1926




THE NEW DRESS


Mabel had her first serious suspicion that something was wrong as she took her cloak off and Mrs. Barnet, while handing her the mirror and touching the brushes and thus drawing her attention, perhaps rather markedly, to all the appliances for tidying and improving hair, complexion, clothes, which existed on the dressing table, confirmed the suspicion-that it was not right, not quite right, which growing stronger as she went upstairs and springing at her, with conviction as she greeted Clarissa Dalloway, she went straight to the far end of the room, to a shaded corner where a looking-glass hung and looked. No! It was not RIGHT. And at once the misery which she always tried to hide, the profound dissatisfaction-the sense she had had, ever since she was a child, of being inferior to other people-set upon her, relentlessly, remorselessly, with an intensity which she could not beat off, as she would when she woke at night at home, by reading Borrow or Scott; for oh these men, oh these women, all were thinking-"What's Mabel wearing? What a fright she looks! What a hideous new dress!"-their eyelids flickering as they came up and then their lids shutting rather tight. It was her own appalling inadequacy; her cowardice; her mean, water-sprinkled blood that depressed her. And at once the whole of the room where, for ever so many hours, she had planned with the little dressmaker how it was to go, seemed sordid, repulsive; and her own drawing-room so shabby, and herself, going out, puffed up with vanity as she touched the letters on the hall table and said: "How dull!" to show off-all this now seemed unutterably silly, paltry, and provincial. All this had been absolutely destroyed, shown up, exploded, the moment she came into Mrs. Dalloway's drawing-room.

What she had thought that evening when, sitting over the teacups, Mrs. Dalloway's invitation came, was that, of course, she could not be fashionable. It was absurd to pretend it even-fashion meant cut, meant style, meant thirty guineas at least-but why not be original? Why not be herself, anyhow? And, getting up, she had taken that old fashion book of her mother's, a Paris fashion book of the time of the Empire, and had thought how much prettier, more dignified, and more womanly they were then, and so set herself-oh, it was foolish-trying to be like them, pluming herself in fact, upon being modest and old-fashioned, and very charming, giving herself up, no doubt about it, to an orgy of self-love, which deserved to be chastised, and so rigged herself out like this.

But she dared not look in the glass. She could not face the whole horror-the pale yellow, idiotically old-fashioned silk dress with its long skirt and its high sleeves and its waist and all the things that looked so charming in the fashion book, but not on her, not among all these ordinary people. She felt like a dressmaker's dummy standing there, for young people to stick pins into.

"But, my dear, it's perfectly charming!" Rose Shaw said, looking her up and down with that little satirical pucker of the lips which she expected-Rose herself being dressed in the height of the fashion, precisely like everybody else, always.

We are all like flies trying to crawl over the edge of the saucer, Mabel thought, and repeated the phrase as if she were crossing herself, as if she were trying to find some spell to annul this pain, to make this agony endurable. Tags of Shakespeare, lines from books she had read ages ago, suddenly came to her when she was in agony, and she repeated them over and over again. "Flies trying to crawl," she repeated. If she could say that over often enough and make herself see the flies, she would become numb, chill, frozen, dumb. Now she could see flies crawling slowly out of a saucer of milk with their wings stuck together; and she strained and strained (standing in front of the looking-glass, listening to Rose Shaw) to make herself see Rose Shaw and all the other people there as flies, trying to hoist themselves out of something, or into something, meagre, insignificant, toiling flies. But she could not see them like that, not other people. She saw herself like that-she was a fly, but the others were dragonflies, butterflies, beautiful insects, dancing, fluttering, skimming, while she alone dragged herself up out of the saucer. (Envy and spite, the most detestable of the vices, were her chief faults.)

"I feel like some dowdy, decrepit, horribly dingy old fly," she said, making Robert Haydon stop just to hear her say that, just to reassure herself by furbishing up a poor weak-kneed phrase and so showing how detached she was, how witty, that she did not feel in the least out of anything. And, of course, Robert Haydon answered something, quite polite, quite insincere, which she saw through instantly, and said to herself, directly he went (again from some book), "Lies, lies, lies!" For a party makes things either much more real, or much less real, she thought; she saw in a flash to the bottom of Robert Haydon's heart; she saw through everything. She saw the truth. THIS was true, this drawing-room, this self, and the other false. Miss Milan's little workroom was really terribly hot, stuffy, sordid. It smelt of clothes and cabbage cooking; and yet, when Miss Milan put the glass in her hand, and she looked at herself with the dress on, finished, an extraordinary bliss shot through her heart. Suffused with light, she sprang into existence. Rid of cares and wrinkles, what she had dreamed of herself was there-a beautiful woman. just for a second (she had not dared look longer, Miss Milan wanted to know about the length of the skirt), there looked at her, framed in the scrolloping mahogany, a grey-white, mysteriously smiling, charming girl, the core of herself, the soul of herself; and it was not vanity only, not only self-love that made her think it good, tender, and true. Miss Milan said that the skirt could not well be longer; if anything the skirt, said Miss Milan, puckering her forehead, considering with all her wits about her, must be shorter; and she felt, suddenly, honestly, full of love for Miss Milan, much, much fonder of Miss Milan than of any one in the whole world, and could have cried for pity that she should be crawling on the floor with her mouth full of pins, and her face red and her eyes bulging-that one human being should be doing this for another, and she saw them all as human beings merely, and herself going off to her party, and Miss Milan pulling the cover over the canary's cage, or letting him pick a hemp-seed from between her lips, and the thought of it, of this side of human nature and its patience and its endurance and its being content with such miserable, scanty, sordid, little pleasures filled her eyes with tears.

And now the whole thing had vanished. The dress, the room, the love, the pity, the scrolloping looking-glass, and the canary's cage-all had vanished, and here she was in a corner of Mrs. Dalloway's drawing-room, suffering tortures, woken wide awake to reality.

But it was all so paltry, weak-blooded, and petty-minded to care so much at her age with two children, to be still so utterly dependent on people's opinions and not have principles or convictions, not to be able to say as other people did, "There's Shakespeare! There's death! We're all weevils in a captain's biscuit"-or whatever it was that people did say.

She faced herself straight in the glass; she pecked at her left shoulder; she issued out into the room, as if spears were thrown at her yellow dress from all sides. But instead of looking fierce or tragic, as Rose Shaw would have done-Rose would have looked like Boadicea-she looked foolish and self-conscious, and simpered like a schoolgirl and slouched across the room, positively slinking, as if she were a beaten mongrel, and looked at a picture, an engraving. As if one went to a party to look at a picture! Everybody knew why she did it-it was from shame, from humiliation.

"Now the fly's in the saucer," she said to herself, "right in the middle, and can't get out, and the milk," she thought, rigidly staring at the picture, "is sticking its wings together."

"It's so old-fashioned," she said to Charles Burt, making him stop (which by itself he hated) on his way to talk to some one else.

She meant, or she tried to make herself think that she meant, that it was the picture and not her dress, that was old-fashioned. And one word of praise, one word of affection from Charles would have made all the difference to her at the moment. If he had only said, "Mabel, you're looking charming to-night!" it would have changed her life. But then she ought to have been truthful and direct. Charles said nothing of the kind, of course. He was malice itself. He always saw through one, especially if one were feeling particularly mean, paltry, or feeble-minded.

"Mabel's got a new dress!" he said, and the poor fly was absolutely shoved into the middle of the saucer. Really, he would like her to drown, she believed. He had no heart, no fundamental kindness, only a veneer of friendliness. Miss Milan was much more real, much kinder. If only one could feel that and stick to it, always. "Why," she asked herself-replying to Charles much too pertly, letting him see that she was out of temper, or "ruffled" as he called it ("Rather ruffled?" he said and went on to laugh at her with some woman over there)-"Why," she asked herself, "can't I feel one thing always, feel quite sure that Miss Milan is right, and Charles wrong and stick to it, feel sure about the canary and pity and love and not be whipped all round in a second by coming into a room full of people?" It was her odious, weak, vacillating character again, always giving at the critical moment and not being seriously interested in conchology, etymology, botany, archeology, cutting up potatoes and watching them fructify like Mary Dennis, like Violet Searle.

Then Mrs. Holman, seeing her standing there, bore down upon her. Of course a thing like a dress was beneath Mrs. Holman's notice, with her family always tumbling downstairs or having the scarlet fever. Could Mabel tell her if Elmthorpe was ever let for August and September? Oh, it was a conversation that bored her unutterably!-it made her furious to be treated like a house agent or a messenger boy, to be made use of. Not to have value, that was it, she thought, trying to grasp something hard, something real, while she tried to answer sensibly about the bathroom and the south aspect and the hot water to the top of the house; and all the time she could see little bits of her yellow dress in the round looking-glass which made them all the size of boot-buttons or tadpoles; and it was amazing to think how much humiliation and agony and self-loathing and effort and passionate ups and downs of feeling were contained in a thing the size of a threepenny bit. And what was still odder, this thing, this Mabel Waring, was separate, quite disconnected; and though Mrs. Holman (the black button) was leaning forward and telling her how her eldest boy had strained his heart running, she could see her, too, quite detached in the looking-glass, and it was impossible that the black dot, leaning forward, gesticulating, should make the yellow dot, sitting solitary, self-centred, feel what the black dot was feeling, yet they pretended.

"So impossible to keep boys quiet"-that was the kind of thing one said.

And Mrs. Holman, who could never get enough sympathy and snatched what little there was greedily, as if it were her right (but she deserved much more for there was her little girl who had come down this morning with a swollen knee-joint), took this miserable offering and looked at it suspiciously, grudgingly, as if it were a halfpenny when it ought to have been a pound and put it away in her purse, must put up with it, mean and miserly though it was, times being hard, so very hard; and on she went, creaking, injured Mrs. Holman, about the girl with the swollen joints. Ah, it was tragic, this greed, this clamour of human beings, like a row of cormorants, barking and flapping their wings for sympathy-it was tragic, could one have felt it and not merely pretended to feel it!

But in her yellow dress to-night she could not wring out one drop more; she wanted it all, all for herself. She knew (she kept on looking into the glass, dipping into that dreadfully showing-up blue pool) that she was condemned, despised, left like this in a backwater, because of her being like this a feeble, vacillating creature; and it seemed to her that the yellow dress was a penance which she had deserved, and if she had been dressed like Rose Shaw, in lovely, clinging green with a ruffle of swansdown, she would have deserved that; and she thought that there was no escape for her-none whatever. But it was not her fault altogether, after all. It was being one of a family of ten; never having money enough, always skimping and paring; and her mother carrying great cans, and the linoleum worn on the stair edges, and one sordid little domestic tragedy after another-nothing catastrophic, the sheep farm failing, but not utterly; her eldest brother marrying beneath him but not very much-there was no romance, nothing extreme about them all. They petered out respectably in seaside resorts; every watering-place had one of her aunts even now asleep in some lodging with the front windows not quite facing the sea. That was so like them-they had to squint at things always. And she had done the same-she was just like her aunts. For all her dreams of living in India, married to some hero like Sir Henry Lawrence, some empire builder (still the sight of a native in a turban filled her with romance), she had failed utterly. She had married Hubert, with his safe, permanent underling's job in the Law Courts, and they managed tolerably in a smallish house, without proper maids, and hash when she was alone or just bread and butter, but now and then-Mrs. Holman was off, thinking her the most dried-up, unsympathetic twig she had ever met, absurdly dressed, too, and would tell every one about Mabel's fantastic appearance-now and then, thought Mabel Waring, left alone on the blue sofa, punching the cushion in order to look occupied, for she would not join Charles Burt and Rose Shaw, chattering like magpies and perhaps laughing at her by the fireplace-now and then, there did come to her delicious moments, reading the other night in bed, for instance, or down by the sea on the sand in the sun, at Easter-let her recall it-a great tuft of pale sand-grass standing all twisted like a shock of spears against the sky, which was blue like a smooth china egg, so firm, so hard, and then the melody of the waves-"Hush, hush," they said, and the children's shouts paddling-yes, it was a divine moment, and there she lay, she felt, in the hand of the Goddess who was the world; rather a hard-hearted, but very beautiful Goddess, a little lamb laid on the altar (one did think these silly things, and it didn't matter so long as one never said them). And also with Hubert sometimes she had quite unexpectedly-carving the mutton for Sunday lunch, for no reason, opening a letter, coming into a room-divine moments, when she said to herself (for she would never say this to anybody else), "This is it. This has happened. This is it!" And the other way about it was equally surprising-that is, when everything was arranged-music, weather, holidays, every reason for happiness was there-then nothing happened at all. One wasn't happy. It was flat, just flat, that was all.

Her wretched self again, no doubt! She had always been a fretful, weak, unsatisfactory mother, a wobbly wife, lolling about in a kind of twilight existence with nothing very clear or very bold, or more one thing than another, like all her brothers and sisters, except perhaps Herbert-they were all the same poor water-veined creatures who did nothing. Then in the midst of this creeping, crawling life, suddenly she was on the crest of a wave. That wretched fly-where had she read the story that kept coming into her mind about the fly and the saucer?-struggled out. Yes, she had those moments. But now that she was forty, they might come more and more seldom. By degrees she would cease to struggle any more. But that was deplorable! That was not to be endured! That made her feel ashamed of herself!

She would go to the London Library to-morrow. She would find some wonderful, helpful, astonishing book, quite by chance, a book by a clergyman, by an American no one had ever heard of; or she would walk down the Strand and drop, accidentally, into a hall where a miner was telling about the life in the pit, and suddenly she would become a new person. She would be absolutely transformed. She would wear a uniform; she would be called Sister Somebody; she would never give a thought to clothes again. And for ever after she would be perfectly clear about Charles Burt and Miss Milan and this room and that room; and it would be always, day after day, as if she were lying in the sun or carving the mutton. It would be it!

So she got up from the blue sofa, and the yellow button in the looking-glass got up too, and she waved her hand to Charles and Rose to show them she did not depend on them one scrap, and the yellow button moved out of the looking-glass, and all the spears were gathered into her breast as she walked towards Mrs. Dalloway and said "Good night."

"But it's top early to go," said Mrs. Dalloway, who was always so charming.

"I'm afraid I must," said Mabel Waring. "But," she added in her weak, wobbly voice which only sounded ridiculous when she tried to strengthen it, "I have enjoyed myself enormously."

'I have enjoyed myself," she said to Mr. Dalloway, whom she met on the stairs.

"Lies, lies, lies!" she said to herself, going downstairs, and "Right in the saucer!" she said to herself as she thanked Mrs. Barnet for helping her and wrapped herself, round and round and round, in the Chinese cloak she had worn these twenty years.

1927




MOMENTS OF BEING



"SLATER'S PINS HAVE NO POINTS"



"Slater's pins have no points-don't you always find that?" said Miss Craye, turning round as the rose fell out of Fanny Wilmot's dress, and Fanny stooped, with her ears full of the music, to look for the pin on the floor.

The words gave her an extraordinary shock, as Miss Craye struck the last chord of the Bach fugue. Did Miss Craye actually go to Slater's and buy pins then, Fanny Wilmot asked herself, transfixed for a moment. Did she stand at the counter waiting like anybody else, and was she given a bill with coppers wrapped in it, and did she slip them into her purse and then, an hour later, stand by her dressing table and take out the pins? What need had she of pins? For she was not so much dressed as cased, like a beetle compactly in its sheath, blue in winter, green in summer. What need had she of pins-Julia Craye-who lived, it seemed in the cool glassy world of Bach fugues, playing to herself what she liked, to take one or two pupils at the one and only consenting Archer Street College of Music (so the Principal, Miss Kingston, said) as a special favour to herself, who had "the greatest admiration for her in every way." Miss Craye was left badly off, Miss Kingston was afraid, at her brother's death. Oh, they used to have such lovely things, when they lived at Salisbury, and her brother Julius was, of course, a very well-known man: a famous archaeologist. It was a great privilege to stay with them, Miss Kingston said ("My family had always known them-they were regular Canterbury people," Miss Kingston said), but a little frightening for a child; one had to be careful not to slam the door or bounce into the room unexpectedly. Miss Kingston, who gave little character sketches like this on the first day of term while she received cheques and wrote out receipts for them, smiled here. Yes, she had been rather a tomboy; she had bounced in and set all those green Roman glasses and things jumping in their case. The Crayes were not used to children. The Crayes were none of them married. They kept cats; the cats, one used to feel, knew as much about the Roman urns and things as anybody.

"Far more than I did!" said Miss Kingston brightly, writing her name across the stamp in her dashing, cheerful, full-bodied hand, for she had always been practical. That was how she made her living, after all.

Perhaps then, Fanny Wilmot thought, looking for the pin, Miss Craye said that about "Slater's pins having no points," at a venture. None of the Crayes had ever married. She knew nothing about pins-nothing whatever. But she wanted to break the spell that had fallen on the house; to break the pane of glass which separated them from other people. When Polly Kingston, that merry little girl, had slammed the door and made the Roman vases jump, Julius, seeing that no harm was done (that would be his first instinct) looked, for the case was stood in the window, at Polly skipping home across the fields; looked with the look his sister often had, that lingering, driving look.

"Stars, sun, moon," it seemed to say, "the daisy in the grass, fires, frost on the window pane, my heart goes out to you. But," it always seemed to add, "you break, you pass, you go." And simultaneously it covered the intensity of both these states of mind with "I can't reach you-I can't get at you," spoken wistfully, frustratedly. And the stars faded, and the child went. That was the kind of spell that was the glassy surface, that Miss Craye wanted to break by showing, when she had played Bach beautifully as a reward to a favourite pupil (Fanny Wilmot knew that she was Miss Craye's favourite pupil), that she, too, knew, like other people, about pins. Slater's pins had no points.

Yes, the "famous archaeologist" had looked like that too. "The famous archaeologist"-as she said that, endorsing cheques, ascertaining the day of the month, speaking so brightly and frankly, there was in Miss Kingston's voice an indescribable tone which hinted at something odd; something queer in Julius Craye; it was the very same thing that was odd perhaps in Julia too. One could have sworn, thought Fanny Wilmot, as she looked for the pin, that at parties, meetings (Miss Kingston's father was a clergyman), she had picked up some piece of gossip, or it might only have been a smile, or a tone when his name was mentioned, which had given her "a feeling" about Julius Craye. Needless to say, she had never spoken about it to anybody. Probably she scarcely knew what she meant by it. But whenever she spoke of Julius, or heard him mentioned, that was the first thing that came to mind; and it was a seductive thought; there was something odd about Julius Craye.

It was so that Julia looked too, as she sat half turned on the music stool, smiling. It's on the field, it's on the pane, it's in the sky-beauty; and I can't get at it; I can't have it-I, she seemed to add, with that little clutch of the hand which was so characteristic, who adore it so passionately, would give the whole world to possess it! And she picked up the carnation which had fallen on the floor, while Fanny searched for the pin. She crushed it, Fanny felt, voluptuously in her smooth veined hands stuck about with water-coloured rings set in pearls. The pressure of her fingers seemed to increase all that was most brilliant in the flower; to set it off; to make it more frilled, fresh, immaculate. What was odd in her, and perhaps in her brother, too, was that this crush and grasp of the finger was combined with a perpetual frustration. So it was even now with the carnation. She had her hands on it; she pressed it; but she did not possess it, enjoy it, not entirely and altogether.

None of the Crayes had married, Fanny Wilmot remembered. She had in mind how one evening when the lesson had lasted longer than usual and it was dark, Julia Craye had said "it's the use of men, surely, to protect us," smiling at her that same odd smile, as she stood fastening her cloak, which made her, like the flower, conscious to her finger tips of youth and brilliance, but, like the flower, too, Fanny suspected, made her feel awkward.

"Oh, but I don't want protection," Fanny had laughed, and when Julia Craye, fixing on her that extraordinary look, had said she was not so sure of that, Fanny positively blushed under the admiration in her eyes.

It was the only use of men, she had said. Was it for that reason then, Fanny wondered, with her eyes on the floor, that she had never married? After all, she had not lived all her life in Salisbury. "Much the nicest part of London," she had said once, "(but I'm speaking of fifteen or twenty years ago) is Kensington. One was in the Gardens in ten minutes-it was like the heart of the country. One could dine out in one's slippers without catching cold. Kensington-it was like a village then, you know," she had said.

Here she broke off, to denounce acridly the draughts in the Tubes.

"It was the use of men," she had said, with a queer wry acerbity. Did that throw any light on the problem why she had not married? One could imagine every sort of scene in her youth, when with her good blue eyes, her straight firm nose, her air of cool distinction, her piano playing, her rose flowering with chaste passion in the bosom of her muslin dress, she had attracted first the young men to whom such things, the china tea cups and the silver candlesticks and the inlaid table, for the Crayes had such nice things, were wonderful; young men not sufficiently distinguished; young men of the cathedral town with ambitions. She had attracted them first, and then her brother's friends from Oxford or Cambridge. They would come down in the summer; row her on the river; continue the argument about Browning by letter; and arrange perhaps, on the rare occasions when she stayed in London, to show her Kensington Gardens?

"Much the nicest part of London-Kensington (I'm speaking of fifteen or twenty years ago)," she had said once. One was in the gardens in ten minutes-in the heart of the country. One could make that yield what one liked, Fanny Wilmot thought, single out, for instance, Mr. Sherman, the painter, an old friend of hers; make him call for her, by appointment, one sunny day in June; take her to have tea under the trees. (They had met, too, at those parties to which one tripped in slippers without fear of catching cold.) The aunt or other elderly relative was to wait there while they looked at the Serpentine. They looked at the Serpentine. He may have rowed her across. They compared it with the Avon. She would have considered the comparison very furiously. Views of rivers were important to her. She sat hunched a little, a little angular, though she was graceful then, steering. At the critical moment, for he had determined that he must speak now-it was his only chance of getting her alone-he was speaking with his head turned at an absurd angle, in his great nervousness, over his shoulder-at that very moment she interrupted fiercely. He would have them into the Bridge, she cried. It was a moment of horror, of disillusionment, of revelation, for both of them. I can't have it, I can't possess it, she thought. He could not see why she had come then. With a great splash of his oar he pulled the boat round. Merely to snub him? He rowed her back and said good-bye to her.

The setting of that scene could be varied as one chose, Fanny Wilmot reflected. (Where had that pin fallen?) It might be Ravenna; or Edinburgh, where she had kept house for her brother. The scene could be changed; and the young man and the exact manner of it all, but one thing was constant-her refusal, and her frown, and her anger with herself afterwards, and her argument, and her relief-yes, certainly her immense relief. The very next day, perhaps, she would get up at six, put on her cloak, and walk all the way from Kensington to the river. She was so thankful that she had not sacrificed her right to go and look at things when they are at their best-before people are up, that is to say she could have her breakfast in bed if she liked. She had not sacrificed her independence.

Yes, Fanny Wilmot smiled, Julia had not endangered her habits. They remained safe; and her habits would have suffered if she had married. "They're ogres," she had said one evening, half laughing, when another pupil, a girl lately married, suddenly bethinking her that she would miss her husband, had rushed off in haste.

"They're ogres," she had said, laughing grimly. An ogre would have interfered perhaps with breakfast in bed; with walks at dawn down to the river. What would have happened (but one could hardly conceive this) had she had children? She took astonishing precautions against chills, fatigue, rich food, the wrong food, draughts, heated rooms, journeys in the Tube. for she could never determine which of these it was exactly that brought on those terrible headaches that gave her life the semblance of a battlefield. She was always engaged in outwitting the enemy, until it seemed as if the pursuit had its interest; could she have beaten the enemy finally she would have found life a little dull. As it was, the tug-of-war was perpetual-on the one side the nightingale or the view which she loved with passion-yes, for views and birds she felt nothing less than passion; on the other the damp path or the horrid long drag up a steep hill which would certainly make her good for nothing next day and bring on one of her headaches. When, therefore, from time to time, she managed her forces adroitly and brought off a visit to Hampton Court the week the crocuses-those glossy bright flowers were her favourite-were at their best, it was a victory. It was something that lasted; something that mattered for ever. She strung the afternoon on the necklace of memorable days, which was not too long for her to be able to recall this one or that one; this view, that city; to finger it, to feel it, to savour, sighing, the quality that made it unique.

"It was so beautiful last Friday," she said, "that I determined I must go there." So she had gone off to Waterloo on her great undertaking-to visit Hampton Court-alone. Naturally, but perhaps foolishly, one pitied her for the thing she never asked pity for (indeed she was reticent habitually, speaking of her health only as a warrior might speak of his foe)-one pitied her for always doing everything alone. Her brother was dead. Her sister was asthmatic. She found the climate of Edinburgh good for her. It was too bleak for Julia. Perhaps, too, she found the associations painful, for her brother, the famous archaeologist, had died there; and she had loved her brother. She lived in a little house off the Brompton Road entirely alone.

Fanny Wilmot saw the pin; she picked it up. She looked at Miss Craye. Was Miss Craye so lonely? No, Miss Craye was steadily, blissfully, if only for that moment, a happy woman. Fanny had surprised her in a moment of ecstasy. She sat there, half turned away from the piano, with her hands clasped in her lap holding the carnation upright, while behind her was the sharp square of the window, uncurtained, purple in the evening, intensely purple after the brilliant electric lights which burnt unshaded in the bare music room. Julia Craye, sitting hunched and compact holding her flower, seemed to emerge out of the London night, seemed to fling it like a cloak behind her, it seemed, in its bareness and intensity, the effluence of her spirit, something she had made which surrounded her. Fanny stared.

All seemed transparent, for a moment, to the gaze of Fanny Wilmot, as if looking through Miss Craye, she saw the very fountain of her being spurting its pure silver drops. She saw back and back into the past behind her. She saw the green Roman vases stood in their case; heard the choristers playing cricket; saw Julia quietly descend the curving steps on to the lawn; then saw her pour out tea beneath the cedar tree; softly enclosed the old man's hand in hers; saw her going round and about the corridors of that ancient Cathedral dwelling place with towels in her hand to mark them; lamenting, as she went, the pettiness of daily life; and slowly ageing, and putting away clothes when summer came, because at her age they were too bright to wear; and tending her father's sickness; and cleaving her way ever more definitely as her will stiffened towards her solitary goal; travelling frugally; counting the cost and measuring out of her tight shut purse the sum needed for this journey or for that old mirror; obstinately adhering, whatever people might say, in choosing her pleasures for herself. She saw Julia-

Julia blazed. Julia kindled. Out of the night she burnt like a dead white star. Julia opened her arms. Julia kissed her on the lips. Julia possessed it.

"Slater's pins have no points," Miss Craye said, laughing queerly and relaxing her arms, as Fanny Wilmot pinned the flower to her breast with trembling fingers.

1928




THE LADY IN THE LOOKING-GLASS



A REFLECTION



People should not leave looking-glasses hanging in their rooms any more than they should leave open cheque books or letters confessing some hideous crime. One could not help looking, that summer afternoon, in the long glass that hung outside in the hall. Chance had so arranged it. From the depths of the sofa in the drawing-room one could see reflected in the Italian glass not only the marble-topped table opposite, but a stretch of the garden beyond. One could see a long grass path leading between banks of tall flowers until, slicing off an angle, the gold rim cut it off.

The house was empty, and one felt, since one was the only person in the drawing-room, like one of those naturalists who, covered with grass and leaves, lie watching the shyest animals-badgers, otters, kingfishers-moving about freely, themselves unseen. The room that afternoon was full of such shy creatures, lights and shadows, curtains blowing, petals falling-things that never happen, so it seems, if someone is looking. The quiet old country room with its rugs and stone chimney pieces, its sunken book-cases and red and gold lacquer cabinets, was full of such nocturnal creatures. They came pirouetting across the floor, stepping delicately with high-lifted feet and spread tails and pecking allusive beaks as if they had been cranes or flocks of elegant flamingoes whose pink was faded, or peacocks whose trains were veiled with silver. And there were obscure flushes and darkenings too, as if a cuttlefish had suddenly suffused the air with purple; and the room had its passions and rages and envies and sorrows coming over it and clouding it, like a human being. Nothing stayed the same for two seconds together.

But, outside, the looking-glass reflected the hall table, the sunflowers, the garden path so accurately and so fixedly that they seemed held there in their reality unescapably. It was a strange contrast-all changing here, all stillness there. One could not help looking from one to the other. Meanwhile, since all the doors and windows were open in the heat, there was a perpetual sighing and ceasing sound, the voice of the transient and the perishing, it seemed, coming and going like human breath, while in the looking-glass things had ceased to breathe and lay still in the trance of immortality.

Half an hour ago the mistress of the house, Isabella Tyson, had gone down the grass path in her thin summer dress, carrying a basket, and had vanished, sliced off by the gilt rim of the looking-glass. She had gone presumably into the lower garden to pick flowers; or as it seemed more natural to suppose, to pick something light and fantastic and leafy and trailing, travellers' joy, or one of those elegant sprays of convolvulus that twine round ugly walls and burst here and there into white and violet blossoms. She suggested the fantastic and the tremulous convolvulus rather than the upright aster, the starched zinnia, or her own burning roses alight like lamps on the straight posts of their rose trees. The comparison showed how very little, after all these years, one knew about her; for it is impossible that any woman of flesh and blood of fifty-five or sixty should be really a wreath or a tendril. Such comparisons are worse than idle and superficial-they are cruel even, for they come like the convolvulus itself trembling between one's eyes and the truth. There must be truth; there must be a wall. Yet it was strange that after knowing her all these years one could not say what the truth about Isabella was; one still made up phrases like this about convolvulus and travellers' joy. As for facts, it was a fact that she was a spinster; that she was rich; that she had bought this house and collected with her own hands-often in the most obscure corners of the world and at great risk from poisonous stings and Oriental diseases-the rugs, the chairs, the cabinets which now lived their nocturnal life before one's eyes. Sometimes it seemed as if they knew more about her than we, who sat on them, wrote at them, and trod on them so carefully, were allowed to know. In each of these cabinets were many little drawers, and each almost certainly held letters, tied with bows of ribbon, sprinkled with sticks of lavender or rose leaves. For it was another fact-if facts were what one wanted-that Isabella had known many people, had had many friends; and thus if one had the audacity to open a drawer and read her letters, one would find the traces of many agitations, of appointments to meet, of upbraidings for not having met, long letters of intimacy and affection, violent letters of jealousy and reproach, terrible final words of parting-for all those interviews and assignations had led to nothing-that is, she had never married, and yet, judging from the mask-like indifference of her face, she had gone through twenty times more of passion and experience than those whose loves are trumpeted forth for all the world to hear. Under the stress of thinking about Isabella, her room became more shadowy and symbolic; the corners seemed darker, the legs of chairs and tables more spindly and hieroglyphic.

Suddenly these reflections were ended violently-and yet without a sound. A large black form loomed into the looking-glass; blotted out everything, strewed the table with a packet of marble tablets veined with pink and grey, and was gone. But the picture was entirely altered. For the moment it was unrecognizable and irrational and entirely out of focus. One could not relate these tablets to any human purpose. And then by degrees some logical process set to work on them and began ordering and arranging them and bringing them into the fold of common experience. One realized at last that they were merely letters. The man had brought the post.

There they lay on the marble-topped table, all dripping with light and colour at first and crude and unabsorbed. And then it was strange to see how they were drawn in and arranged and composed and made part of the picture and granted that stillness and immortality which the looking-glass conferred. They lay there invested with a new reality and significance and with a greater heaviness, too, as if it would have needed a chisel to dislodge them from the table. And, whether it was fancy or not, they seemed to have become not merely a handful of casual letters but to be tablets graven with eternal truth-if one could read them, one would know everything there was to be known about Isabella, yes, and about life, too. The pages inside those marble-looking envelopes must be cut deep and scored thick with meaning. Isabella would come in, and take them, one by one, very slowly, and open them, and read them carefully word by word, and then with a profound sigh of comprehension, as if she had seen to the bottom of everything, she would tear the envelopes to little bits and tie the letters together and lock the cabinet drawer in her determination to conceal what she did not wish to be known.

The thought served as a challenge. Isabella did not wish to be known-but she should no longer escape. It was absurd, it was monstrous. If she concealed so much and knew so much one must prise her open with the first tool that came to hand-the imagination. One must fix one's mind upon her at that very moment. One must fasten her down there. One must refuse to be put off any longer with sayings and doings such as the moment brought forth-with dinners and visits and polite conversations. One must put oneself in her shoes. If one took the phrase literally, it was easy to see the shoes in which she stood, down in the lower garden, at this moment. They were very narrow and long and fashionable-they were made of the softest and most flexible leather. Like everything she wore, they were exquisite. And she would be standing under the high hedge in the lower part of the garden, raising the scissors that were tied to her waist to cut some dead flower, some overgrown branch. The sun would beat down on her face, into her eyes; but no, at the critical moment a veil of cloud covered the sun, making the expression of her eyes doubtful-was it mocking or tender, brilliant or dull? One could only see the indeterminate outline of her rather faded, fine face looking at the sky. She was thinking, perhaps, that she must order a new net for the strawberries; that she must send flowers to Johnson's widow; that it was time she drove over to see the Hippesleys in their new house. Those were the things she talked about at dinner certainly. But one was tired of the things that she talked about at dinner. It was her profounder state of being that one wanted to catch and turn to words, the state that is to the mind what breathing is to the body, what one calls happiness or unhappiness. At the mention of those words it became obvious, surely, that she must be happy. She was rich; she was distinguished; she had many friends; she travelled-she bought rugs in Turkey and blue pots in Persia. Avenues of pleasure radiated this way and that from where she stood with her scissors raised to cut the trembling branches while the lacy clouds veiled her face.

Here with a quick movement of her scissors she snipped the spray of travellers' joy and it fell to the ground. As it fell, surely some light came in too, surely one could penetrate a little farther into her being. Her mind then was filled with tenderness and regret. . . . To cut an overgrown branch saddened her because it had once lived, and life was dear to her. Yes, and at the same time the fall of the branch would suggest to her how she must die herself and all the futility and evanescence of things. And then again quickly catching this thought up, with her instant good sense, she thought life had treated her well; even if fall she must, it was to lie on the earth and moulder sweetly into the roots of violets. So she stood thinking. Without making any thought precise-for she was one of those reticent people whose minds hold their thoughts enmeshed in clouds of silence-she was filled with thoughts. Her mind was like her room, in which lights advanced and retreated, came pirouetting and stepping delicately, spread their tails, pecked their way; and then her whole being was suffused, like the room again, with a cloud of some profound knowledge, some unspoken regret, and then she was full of locked drawers, stuffed with letters, like her cabinets. To talk of "prising her open" as if she were an oyster, to use any but the finest and subtlest and most pliable tools upon her was impious and absurd. One must imagine-here was she in the looking-glass. It made one start.

She was so far off at first that one could not see her clearly. She came lingering and pausing, here straightening a rose, there lifting a pink to smell it, but she never stopped; and all the time she became larger and larger in the looking-glass, more and more completely the person into whose mind one had been trying to penetrate. One verified her by degrees-fitted the qualities one had discovered into this visible body. There were her grey-green dress, and her long shoes, her basket, and something sparkling at her throat. She came so gradually that she did not seem to derange the pattern in the glass, but only to bring in some new element which gently moved and altered the other objects as if asking them, courteously, to make room for her. And the letters and the table and the grass walk and the sunflowers which had been waiting in the looking-glass separated and opened out so that she might be received among them. At last there she was, in the hall. She stopped dead. She stood by the table. She stood perfectly still. At once the lookingglass began to pour over her a light that seemed to fix her; that seemed like some acid to bite off the unessential and superficial and to leave only the truth. It was an enthralling spectacle. Everything dropped from her-clouds, dress, basket, diamond-all that one had called the creeper and convolvulus. Here was the hard wall beneath. Here was the woman herself. She stood naked in that pitiless light. And there was nothing. Isabella was perfectly empty. She had no thoughts. She had no friends. She cared for nobody. As for her letters, they were all bills. Look, as she stood there, old and angular, veined and lined, with her high nose and her wrinkled neck, she did not even trouble to open them.

People should not leave looking-glasses hanging in their rooms.

1929




THE SHOOTING PARTY


She got in and put her suit case in the rack, and the brace of pheasants on top of it. Then she sat down in the corner. The train was rattling through the midlands, and the fog, which came in when she opened the door, seemed to enlarge the carriage and set the four travellers apart. Obviously M. M.-those were the initials on the suit case-had been staying the week-end with a shooting party. Obviously, for she was telling over the story now, lying back in her corner. She did not shut her eyes. But clearly she did not see the man opposite, nor the coloured photograph of York Minster. She must have heard, too, what they had been saying. For as she gazed, her lips moved; now and then she smiled. And she was handsome; a cabbage rose; a russet apple; tawny; but scarred on the jaw-the scar lengthened when she smiled. Since she was telling over the story she must have been a guest there, and yet, dressed as she was out of fashion as women dressed, years ago, in pictures, in sporting newspapers, she did not seem exactly a guest, nor yet a maid. Had she had a basket with her she would have been the woman who breeds fox terriers; the owner of the Siamese cat; some one connected with hounds and horses. But she had only a suit case and the pheasants. Somehow, therefore, she must have wormed her way into the room that she was seeing through the stuffing of the carriage, and the man's bald head, and the picture of York Minster. And she must have listened to what they were saying, for now, like somebody imitating the noise that someone else makes, she made a little click at the back of her throat. "Chk." Then she smiled.

"Chk," said Miss Antonia, pinching her glasses on her nose. The damp leaves fell across the long windows of the gallery; one or two stuck, fish shaped, and lay like inlaid brown wood upon the window panes. Then the trees in the Park shivered, and the leaves, flaunting down, seemed to make the shiver visible-the damp brown shiver.

"Chk." Miss Antonia sniffed again, and pecked at the flimsy white stuff that she held in her hands, as a hen pecks nervously rapidly at a piece of white bread.

The wind sighed. The room was draughty. The doors did not fit, nor the windows. Now and then a ripple, like a reptile, ran under the carpet. On the carpet lay panels of green and yellow, where the sun rested, and then the sun moved and pointed a finger as if in mockery at a hole in the carpet and stopped. And then on it went, the sun's feeble but impartial finger, and lay upon the coat of arms over the fireplace-gently illumined-the shield, the pendant grapes, the mermaid, and the spears. Miss Antonia looked up as the light strengthened. Vast lands, so they said, the old people had owned-her forefathers-the Rashleighs. Over there. Up the Amazons. Freebooter. Voyagers. Sacks of emeralds. Nosing round the island. Taking captives. Maidens. There she was, all scales from the tail to the waist. Miss Antonia grinned. Down struck the finger of the sun and her eye went with it. Now it rested on a silver frame; on a photograph; on an egg-shaped baldish head, on a lip that stuck out under the moustache; and the name "Edward" written with a flourish beneath.

"The King. . ." Miss Antonia muttered, turning the film of white upon her knee-"had the Blue Room," she added with a toss of her head as the light faded.

Out in the King's Ride the pheasants were being driven across the noses of the guns. Up they spurted from the underwood like heavy rockets, reddish purple rockets, and as they rose the guns cracked in order, eagerly, sharply, as if a line of dogs had suddenly barked. Tufts of white smoke held together for a moment; then gently solved themselves, faded, and dispersed.

In the deep cut road beneath the hanger, a cart stood, laid already with soft warm bodies, with limp claws, and still lustrous eyes. The birds seemed alive still, but swooning under their rich damp feathers. They looked relaxed and comfortable, stirring slightly, as if they slept upon a warm bank of soft feathers on the floor of the cart.

Then the Squire, with the hang-dog stained face, in the shabby gaiters, cursed and raised his gun.



Miss Antonia stitched on. Now and then a tongue of flame reached round the grey log that stretched from one bar to another across the grate, ate it greedily, then died out, leaving a white bracelet where the bark had been eaten off. Miss Antonia looked up for a moment, stared wide eyed, instinctively, as a dog stares at a flame. Then the flame sank and she stitched again.

Then, silently, the enormously high door opened. Two lean men came in, and drew a table over the hole in the carpet. They went out; they came in. They laid a cloth upon the table. They went out; they came in. They brought a green baize basket of knives and forks; and glasses; and sugar casters; and salt cellars; and bread; and a silver vase with three chrysanthemums in it. And the table was laid. Miss Antonia stitched on.

Again the door opened, pushed feebly this time. A little dog trotted in, a spaniel nosing nimbly; it paused. The door stood open. And then, leaning on her stick, heavily, old Miss Rashleigh entered. A white shawl, diamond fastened, clouded her baldness. She hobbled; crossed the room; hunched herself in the high-backed chair by the fireside. Miss Antonia went on stitching.

"Shooting," she said at last.

Old Miss Rashleigh nodded. She gripped her stick. They sat waiting.

The shooters had moved now from the King's Ride to the Home Woods. They stood in the purple ploughed field outside. Now and then a twig snapped; leaves came whirling. But above the mist and the smoke was an island of blue-faint blue, pure blue-alone in the sky. And in the innocent air, as if straying alone like a cherub, a bell from a far hidden steeple frolicked, gambolled, then faded. Then again up shot the rockets, the reddish purple pheasants. Up and up they went. Again the guns barked; the smoke balls formed; loosened, dispersed. And the busy little dogs ran nosing nimbly over the fields; and the warm damp bodies, still languid and soft, as if in a swoon, were bunched together by the men in gaiters and flung into the cart.

"There!" grunted Milly Masters, the house-keeper, throwing down her glasses. She was stitching, too, in the small dark room that overlooked the stable yard. The jersey, the rough woollen jersey, for her son, the boy who cleaned the Church, was finished. "The end 'o that!" she muttered. Then she heard the cart. Wheels ground on the cobbles. Up she got. With her hands to her hair, her chestnut coloured hair, she stood in the yard, in the wind.

"Coming!" she laughed, and the scar on her cheek lengthened. She unbolted the door of the game room as Wing, the keeper, drove the cart over the cobbles. The birds were dead now, their claws gripped tight, though they gripped nothing. The leathery eyelids were creased greyly over their eyes. Mrs. Masters the housekeeper, Wing the gamekeeper, took bunches of dead birds by the neck and flung them down on the slate floor of the game larder. The slate floor became smeared and spotted with blood. The pheasants looked smaller now, as if their bodies had shrunk together. Then Wing lifted the tail of the cart and drove in the pins which secured it. The sides of the cart were stuck about with little grey-blue feathers, and the floor was smeared and stained with blood. But it was empty.

"The last of the lot!" Milly Masters grinned as the cart drove off.

"Luncheon is served, ma'am," said the butler. He pointed at the table; he directed the footman. The dish with the silver cover was placed precisely there where he pointed. They waited, the butler and the footman.

Miss Antonia laid her white film upon the basket; put away her silk; her thimble; stuck her needle through a piece of flannel; and hung her glasses on a hook upon her breast. Then she rose.

"Luncheon!" she barked in old Miss Rashleigh's ear. One second later old Miss Rashleigh stretched her leg out; gripped her stick; and rose too. Both old women advanced slowly to the table; and were tucked in by the butler and the footman, one at this end, one at that. Off came the silver cover. And there was the pheasant, featherless, gleaming; the thighs tightly pressed to its side; and little mounds of breadcrumbs were heaped at either end.



Miss Antonia drew the carving knife across the pheasant's breast firmly. She cut two slices and laid them on a plate. Deftly the footman whipped it from her, and old Miss Rashleigh raised her knife. Shots rang out in the wood under the window.

"Coming?" said old Miss Rashleigh, suspending her fork.

The branches flung and flaunted on the trees in the Park.

She took a mouthful of pheasant. Falling leaves flicked the window pane; one or two stuck to the glass.

"The Home Woods, now," said Miss Antonia. "Hugh's lost that." "Shooting." She drew her knife down the other side of the breast. She added potatoes and gravy, brussel sprouts and bread sauce methodically in a circle round the slices on her plate. The butler and the footman stood watching, like servers at a feast. The old ladies ate quietly; silently; nor did they hurry themselves; methodically they cleaned the bird. Bones only were left on their plates. Then the butler drew the decanter towards Miss Antonia, and paused for a moment with his head bent.

"Give it here, Griffiths," said Miss Antonia, and took the carcase in her fingers and tossed it to the spaniel beneath the table. The butler and the footman bowed and went out.

"Coming closer," said Miss Rashleigh, listening. The wind was rising. A brown shudder shook the air; leaves flew too fast to stick. The glass rattled in the windows.

"Birds wild," Miss Antonia nodded, watching the helter-skelter.

Old Miss Rashleigh filled her glass. As they sipped their eyes became lustrous like half precious stones held to the light. Slate blue were Miss Rashleigh's; Miss Antonia's red, like port. And their laces and their flounces seemed to quiver, as if their bodies were warm and languid underneath their feathers as they drank.

"It was a day like this, d'you remember?" said old Miss Rashleigh, fingering her glass. "They brought him home-a bullet through his heart. A bramble, so they said. Tripped. Caught his foot. . . ." She chuckled as she sipped her wine.

"And John . . ." said Miss Antonia. "The mare, they said, put her foot in a hole. Died in the field. The hunt rode over him. He came home, too, on a shutter. . . They sipped again.

"Remember Lily?" said old Miss Rashleigh. "A bad 'un." She shook her head. "Riding with a scarlet tassel on her cane. . . ."

"Rotten at the heart!" cried Miss Antonia.

"Remember the Colonel's letter. Your son rode as if he had twenty devils in him-charged at the head of his men. Then one white devil-ah hah!" She sipped again.

"The men of our house," began Miss Rashleigh. She raised her glass. She held it high, as if she toasted the mermaid carved in plaster on the fireplace. She paused. The guns were barking. Something cracked in the woodwork. Or was it a rat running behind the plaster?

"Always women . . ." Miss Antonia nodded. "The men of our house. Pink and white Lucy at the Mill-d'you remember?"

"Ellen's daughter at the Goat and Sickle," Miss Rashleigh added.

"And the girl at the tailor's," Miss Antonia murmured, "where Hugh bought his riding breeches, the little dark shop on the right . . ."

". . . that used to be flooded every winter. It's his boy," Miss Antonia chuckled, leaning towards her sister, "that cleans the Church."

There was a crash. A slate had fallen down the chimney. The great log had snapped in two. Flakes of plaster fell from the shield above the fireplace.

"Falling," old Miss Rashleigh chuckled. "Falling."

"And who," said Miss Antonia, looking at the flakes on the carpet, "who's to pay?"

Crowing like old babies, indifferent, reckless, they laughed; crossed to the fireplace, and sipped the sherry by the wood ashes and the plaster, until each glass held only one drop of wine, reddish purple, at the bottom. And this the old women did not wish to part with, so it seemed; for they fingered their glasses, as they sat side by side by the ashes; but they never raised them to their lips.

"Milly Masters in the still room," began old Miss Rashleigh. "She's our brother's . . ."

A shot barked beneath the window. It cut the string that held the rain. Down it poured, down, down, down, in straight rods whipping the windows. Light faded from the carpet. Light faded in their eyes, too, as they sat by the white ashes listening. Their eyes became like pebbles, taken from water; grey stones dulled and dried. And their hands gripped their hands like the claws of dead birds gripping nothing. And they shrivelled as if the bodies inside the clothes had shrunk.

Then Miss Antonia raised her glass to the mermaid. It was the last drop; she drank it off. "Coming!" she croaked, and slapped the glass down. A door banged below. Then another. Then another. Feet could be heard trampling, yet shuffling, along the corridor towards the gallery.

"Closer! Closer!" grinned Miss Rashleigh, baring her three yellow teeth.

The immensely high door burst open. In rushed three great hounds and stood panting. Then there entered, slouching, the Squire himself in shabby gaiters. The dogs pressed round him, tossing their heads, snuffling at his pockets. Then they bounded forward. They smelt the meat. The floor of the gallery waved like a windlashed forest with the tails and backs of the great questing hounds. They snuffed the table. They pawed the cloth. Then, with a wild neighing whimper, they flung themselves upon the little yellow spaniel who was gnawing the carcass under the table.

"Curse you, curse you!" howled the Squire. But his voice was weak, as if he shouted against a wind. "Curse you, curse you!" he shouted, now cursing his sisters.

Miss Antonia and Miss Rashleigh rose to their feet. The great dogs had seized the spaniel. They worried him, they mauled him with their great yellow teeth. The Squire swung a leather knotted tawse this way and that way, cursing the dogs, cursing his sisters, in the voice that sounded so loud yet so weak. With one lash he curled to the ground the vase of chrysanthemums. Another caught old Miss Rashleigh on the cheek. The old woman staggered backwards. She fell against the mantelpiece. Her stick, striking wildly, struck the shield above the fireplace. She fell with a thud upon the ashes. The shield of the Rashleighs crashed from the wall. Under the mermaid, under the spears, she lay buried.

The wind lashed the panes of glass; shots volleyed in the Park and a tree fell. And then King Edward, in the silver frame, slid, toppled, and fell too.



The grey mist had thickened in the carriage. It hung down like a veil; it seemed to put the four travellers in the corners at a great distance from each other, though in fact they were as close as a third class railway carriage could bring them. The effect was strange. The handsome, if elderly, the well dressed, if rather shabby woman, who had got into the train at some station in the midlands, seemed to have lost her shape. Her body had become all mist. Only her eyes gleamed, changed, lived all by themselves, it seemed; eyes without a body; eyes seeing something invisible. In the misty air they shone out, they moved, so that in the sepulchral atmosphere-the windows were blurred, the lamps haloed with fog-they were like lights dancing, will o' the wisps that move, people say, over the graves of unquiet sleepers in churchyards. An absurd idea? Mere fancy! Yet after all, since there is nothing that does not leave some residue, and memory is a light that dances in the mind when the reality is buried, why should not the eyes there, gleaming, moving, be the ghost of a family, of an age, of a civilization dancing over the grave?

The train slowed down. Lamps stood up. They were felled. Up they stood again as the train slid into the station. The lights blazed. And the eyes in the corner? They were shut. Perhaps the light was too strong. And of course in the full blaze of the station lamps it was plain-she was quite an ordinary, rather elderly, woman, travelling to London on some ordinary piece of business-something connected with a cat, or a horse, or a dog. She reached for her suit case, rose, and took the pheasants from the rack. But did she, all the same, as she opened the carriage door and stepped out, murmur "Chk., Chk." as she passed?

1938




THE DUCHESS AND THE JEWELLER


Oliver Bacon lived at the top of a house overlooking the Green Park. He had a flat; chairs jutted out at the right angles-chairs covered in hide. Sofas filled the bays of the windows-sofas covered in tapestry. The windows, the three long windows, had the proper allowance of discreet net and figured satin. The mahogany sideboard bulged discreetly with the right brandies, whiskeys and liqueurs. And from the middle window he looked down upon the glossy roofs of fashionable cars packed in the narrow straits of Piccadilly. A more Central position could not be imagined. And at eight in the morning he would have his breakfast brought in on a tray by a man-servant: the man-servant would unfold his crimson dressing-gown; he would rip his letters open with his long pointed nails and would extract thick white cards of invitation upon which the engraving stood up roughly from duchesses, countesses, viscountesses and Honourable Ladies. Then he would wash; then he would eat his toast; then he would read his paper by the bright burning fire of electric coals.

"Behold Oliver," he would say, addressing himself. "You who began life in a filthy little alley, you who . . ." and he would look down at his legs, so shapely in their perfect trousers; at his boots; at his spats. They were all shapely, shining; cut from the best cloth by the best scissors in Savile Row. But he dismantled himself often and became again a little boy in a dark alley. He had once thought that the height of his ambition-selling stolen dogs to fashionable women in Whitechapel. And once he had been done. "Oh, Oliver," his mother had wailed. "Oh, Oliver! When will you have sense, my son?" . . . Then he had gone behind a counter; had sold cheap watches; then he had taken a wallet to Amsterdam. . . . At that memory he would churckle-the old Oliver remembering the young. Yes, he had done well with the three diamonds; also there was the commission on the emerald. After that he went into the private room behind the shop in Hatton Garden; the room with the scales, the safe, the thick magnifying glasses. And then . . . and then . . . He chuckled. When he passed through the knots of jewellers in the hot evening who were discussing prices, gold mines, diamonds, reports from South Africa, one of them would lay a finger to the side of his nose and murmur, "Hum-m-m," as he passed. It was no more than a murmur; no more than a nudge on the shoulder, a finger on the nose, a buzz that ran through the cluster of jewellers in Hatton Garden on a hot afternoon-oh, many years ago now! But still Oliver felt it purring down his spine, the nudge, the murmur that meant, "Look at him-young Oliver, the young jeweller-there he goes." Young he was then. And he dressed better and better; and had, first a hansom cab; then a car; and first he went up to the dress circle, then down into the stalls. And he had a villa at Richmond, overlooking the river, with trellises of red roses; and Mademoiselle used to pick one every morning and stick it in his buttonhole.

"So," said Oliver Bacon, rising and stretching his legs. "SO . . ."

And he stood beneath the picture of an old lady on the mantelpiece and raised his hands. "I have kept my word," he said, laying his hands together, palm to palm, as if he were doing homage to her. "I have won my bet." That was so; he was the richest jeweller in England; but his nose, which was long and flexible, like an elephant's trunk, seemed to say by its curious quiver at the nostrils (but it seemed as if the whole nose quivered, not only the nostrils) that he was not satisfied yet; still smelt something under the ground a little further off. Imagine a giant hog in a pasture rich with truffles; after unearthing this truffle and that, still it smells a bigger, a blacker truffle under the ground further off. So Oliver snuffed always in the rich earth of Mayfair another truffle, a blacker, a bigger further off.

Now then he straightened the pearl in his tie, cased himself in his smart blue overcoat; took his yellow gloves and his cane; and swayed as he descended the stairs and half snuffed, half sighed through his long sharp nose as he passed out into Piccadilly. For was he not still a sad man, a dissatisfied man, a man who seeks something that is hidden, though he had won his bet?

He swayed slightly as he walked, as the camel at the zoo sways from side to side when it walks along the asphalt paths laden with grocers and their wives eating from paper bags and throwing little bits of silver paper crumpled up on to the path. The camel despises the grocers; the camel is dissatisfied with its lot; the camel sees the blue lake and the fringe of palm trees in front of it. So the great jeweller, the greatest jeweller in the whole world, swung down Piccadilly, perfectly dressed, with his gloves, with his cane; but dissatisfied still, till he reached the dark little shop, that was famous in France, in Germany, in Austria, in Italy, and all over America-the dark little shop in the street off Bond Street.

As usual, he strode through the shop without speaking, though the four men, the two old men, Marshall and Spencer, and the two young men, Hammond and Wicks, stood straight and looked at him, envying him. It was only with one finger of the amber-coloured glove, waggling, that he acknowledged their presence. And he went in and shut the door of his private room behind him.

Then he unlocked the grating that barred the window. The cries of Bond Street came in; the purr of the distant traffic. The light from reflectors at the back of the shop struck upwards. One tree waved six green leaves, for it was June. But Mademoiselle had married Mr. Pedder of the local brewery-no one stuck roses in his buttonhole now.

"So," he half sighed, half snorted, "so-"

Then he touched a spring in the wall and slowly the panelling slid open, and behind it were the steel safes, five, no, six of them, all of burnished steel. He twisted a key; unlocked one; then another. Each was lined with a pad of deep crimson velvet; in each lay jewels-bracelets, necklaces, rings, tiaras, ducal coronets; loose stones in glass shells; rubies, emeralds, pearls, diamonds. All safe, shining, cool, yet burning, eternally, with their own compressed light.

"Tears!" said Oliver, looking at the pearls.

"Heart's blood!" he said, looking at the rubies.

"Gunpowder!" he continued, rattling the diamonds so that they flashed and blazed.

"Gunpowder enough to blow Mayfair-sky high, high, high!" He threw his head back and made a sound like a horse neighing as he said it.

The telephone buzzed obsequiously in a low muted voice on his table. He shut the safe.

"In ten minutes," he said. "Not before." And he sat down at his desk and looked at the heads of the Roman emperors that were graved on his sleeve links. And again he dismantled himself and became once more the little boy playing marbles in the alley where they sell stolen dogs on Sunday. He became that wily astute little boy, with lips like wet cherries. He dabbled his fingers in ropes of tripe; he dipped them in pans of frying fish; he dodged in and out among the crowds. He was slim, lissome, with eyes like licked stones. And now-now-the hands of the clock ticked on, one two, three, four. . . . The Duchess of Lambourne waited his pleasure; the Duchess of Lambourne, daughter of a hundred Earls. She would wait for ten minutes on a chair at the counter. She would wait his pleasure. She would wait till he was ready to see her. He watched the clock in its shagreen case. The hand moved on. With each tick the clock handed him-so it seemed-PATE DE FOIE GRAS, a glass of champagne, another of fine brandy, a cigar costing one guinea. The clock laid them on the table beside him as the ten minutes passed. Then he heard soft slow footsteps approaching; a rustle in the corridor. The door opened. Mr. Hammond flattened himself against the wall.

"Her Grace!" he announced.

And he waited there, flattened against the wall.

And Oliver, rising, could hear the rustle of the dress of the Duchess as she came down the passage. Then she loomed up, filling the door, filling the room with the aroma, the prestige, the arrogance, the pomp, the pride of all the Dukes and Duchesses swollen in one wave. And as a wave breaks, she broke, as she sat down, spreading and splashing and falling over Oliver Bacon, the great jeweller, covering him with sparkling bright colours, green, rose, violet; and odours; and iridescences; and rays shooting from fingers, nodding from plumes, flashing from silk; for she was very large, very fat, tightly girt in pink taffeta, and past her prime. As a parasol with many flounces, as a peacock with many feathers, shuts its flounces, folds its feathers, so she subsided and shut herself as she sank down in the leather armchair.

"Good morning, Mr. Bacon," said the Duchess. And she held out her hand which came through the slit of her white glove. And Oliver bent low as he shook it. And as their hands touched the link was forged between them once more. They were friends, yet enemies; he was master, she was mistress; each cheated the other, each needed the other, each feared the other, each felt this and knew this every time they touched hands thus in the little back room with the white light outside, and the tree with its six leaves, and the sound of the street in the distance and behind them the safes.

"And to-day, Duchess-what can I do for you to-day?" said Oliver, very softly.

The Duchess opened her heart, her private heart, gaped wide. And with a sigh but no words she took from her bag a long washleather pouch-it looked like a lean yellow ferret. And from a slit in the ferret's belly she dropped pearls-ten pearls. They rolled from the slit in the ferret's belly-one, two, three, four-like the eggs of some heavenly bird.

"All's that's left me, dear Mr. Bacon," she moaned. Five, six, seven-down they rolled, down the slopes of the vast mountain sides that fell between her knees into one narrow valley-the eighth, the ninth, and the tenth. There they lay in the glow of the peach-blossom taffeta. Ten pearls.

"From the Appleby cincture," she mourned. "The last . . . the last of them all."

Oliver stretched out and took one of the pearls between finger and thumb. It was round, it was lustrous. But real was it, or false? Was she lying again? Did she dare?

She laid her plump padded finger across her lips. "If the Duke knew . . ." she whispered. "Dear Mr. Bacon, a bit of bad luck. . ."

Been gambling again, had she?

"That villain! That sharper!" she hissed.

The man with the chipped cheek bone? A bad 'un. And the Duke was straight as a poker; with side whiskers; would cut her off, shut her up down there if he knew-what I know, thought Oliver, and glanced at the safe.

"Araminta, Daphne, Diana," she moaned. "It's for THEM."

The ladies Araminta, Daphne, Diana-her daughters. He knew them; adored them. But it was Diana he loved.

"You have all my secrets," she leered. Tears slid; tears fell; tears, like diamonds, collecting powder in the ruts of her cherry blossom cheeks.

"Old friend," she murmured, "old friend."

"Old friend," he repeated, "old friend," as if he licked the words.

"How much?" he queried.

She covered the pearls with her hand.

"Twenty thousand," she whispered.

But was it real or false, the one he held in his hand? The Appleby cincture-hadn't she sold it already? He would ring for Spencer or Hammond. "Take it and test it," he would say. He stretched to the bell.

"You will come down to-morrow?" she urged, she interrupted. "The Prime Minister-His Royal Highness . . ." She stopped. "And Diana . . ." she added.

Oliver took his hand off the bell.

He looked past her, at the backs of the houses in Bond Street. But he saw, not the houses in Bond Street, but a dimpling river; and trout rising and salmon; and the Prime Minister; and himself too, in white waistcoat; and then, Diana. He looked down at the pearl in his hand. But how could he test it, in the light of the river, in the light of the eyes of Diana? But the eyes of the Duchess were on him.

"Twenty thousand," she moaned. "My honour!"

The honour of the mother of Diana! He drew his cheque book towards him; he took out his pen.

"Twenty-" he wrote. Then he stopped writing. The eyes of the old woman in the picture were on him-of the old woman his mother.

"Oliver!" she warned him. "Have sense! Don't be a fool!"

"Oliver!" the Duchess entreated-it was "Oliver" now, not "Mr. Bacon." "You'll come for a long weekend?"

Alone in the woods with Diana! Riding alone in the woods with Diana!

"Thousand," he wrote, and signed it.

"Here you are," he said.

And there opened all the flounces of the parasol, all the plumes of the peacock, the radiance of the wave, the swords and spears of Agincourt, as she rose from her chair. And the two old men and the two young men, Spencer and Marshall, Wicks and Hammond, flattened themselves behind the counter envying him as he led her through the shop to the door. And he waggled his yellow glove in their faces, and she held her honour-a cheque for twenty thousand pounds with his signature-quite firmly in her hands.



"Are they false or are they real?" asked Oliver, shutting his private door. There they were, ten pearls on the blotting-paper on the table. He took them to the window. He held them under his lens to the light. . . . This, then, was the truffle he had routed out of the earth! Rotten at the centre-rotten at the core!

"Forgive me, oh, my mother!" he sighed, raising his hand as if he asked pardon of the old woman in the picture. And again he was a little boy in the alley where they sold dogs on Sunday.

"For," he murmured, laying the palms of his hands together, "it is to be a long week-end."

1938




LAPPIN AND LAPPINOVA


They were married. The wedding march pealed out. The pigeons fluttered. Small boys in Eton jackets threw rice; a fox terrier sauntered across the path; and Ernest Thorburn led his bride to the car through that small inquisitive crowd of complete strangers which always collects in London to enjoy other people's happiness or unhappiness. Certainly he looked handsome and she looked shy. More rice was thrown, and the car moved off.

That was on Tuesday. Now it was Saturday. Rosalind had still to get used to the fact that she was Mrs. Ernest Thorburn. Perhaps she never would get used to the fact that she was Mrs. Ernest Anybody, she thought, as she sat in the bow window of the hotel looking over the lake to the mountains, and waited for her husband to come down to breakfast. Ernest was a difficult name to get used to. It was not the name she would have chosen. She would have preferred Timothy, Antony, or Peter. He did not look like Ernest either. The name suggested the Albert Memorial, mahogany sideboards, steel engravings of the Prince Consort with his family-her mother-in-law's dining-room in Porchester Terrace in short.

But here he was. Thank goodness he did not look like Ernest-no. But what did he look like? She glanced at him sideways. Well, when he was eating toast he looked like a rabbit. Not that anyone else would have seen a likeness to a creature so diminutive and timid in this spruce, muscular young man with the straight nose, the blue eyes, and the very firm mouth. But that made it all the more amusing. His nose twitched very slightly when he ate. So did her pet rabbit's. She kept watching his nose twitch; and then she had to explain, when he caught her looking at him, why she laughed.

"It's because you're like a rabbit, Ernest," she said. "Like a wild rabbit," she added, looking at him. "A hunting rabbit; a King Rabbit; a rabbit that makes laws for all the other rabbits."

Ernest had no objection to being that kind of rabbit, and since it amused her to see him twitch his nose-he had never known that his nose twitched-he twitched it on purpose. And she laughed and laughed; and he laughed too, so that the maiden ladies and the fishing man and the Swiss waiter in his greasy black jacket all guessed right; they were very happy. But how long does such happiness last? they asked themselves; and each answered according to his own circumstances.

At lunch time, seated on a clump of heather beside the lake, "Lettuce, rabbit?" said Rosalind, holding out the lettuce that had been provided to eat with the hardboiled eggs. "Come and take it out of my hand," she added, and he stretched out and nibbled the lettuce and twitched his nose.

"Good rabbit, nice rabbit," she said, patting him, as she used to pat her tame rabbit at home. But that was absurd. He was not a tame rabbit, whatever he was. She turned it into French. "Lapin," she called him. But whatever he was, he was not a French rabbit. He was simply and solely English-born at Porchester Terrace, educated at Rugby; now a clerk in His Majesty's Civil Service. So she tried "Bunny" next; but that was worse. "Bunny" was someone plump and soft and comic; he was thin and hard and serious. Still, his nose twitched. "Lappin," she exclaimed suddenly; and gave a little cry as if she had found the very word she looked for.

"Lappin, Lappin, King Lappin," she repeated. It seemed to suit him exactly; he was not Ernest, he was King Lappin. Why? She did not know.

When there was nothing new to talk about on their long solitary walks-and it rained, as everyone had warned them that it would rain; or when they were sitting over the fire in the evening, for it was cold, and the maiden ladies had gone and the fishing man, and the waiter only came if you rang the bell for him, she let her fancy play with the story of the Lappin tribe. Under her hands-she was sewing; he was readingthey became very real, very vivid, very amusing. Ernest put down the paper and helped her. There were the black rabbits and the red; there were the enemy rabbits and the friendly. There were the wood in which they lived and the outlying prairies and the swamp. Above all there was King Lappin, who, far from having only the one trick-that he twitched his nose-became as the days passed an animal of the greatest character; Rosalind was always finding new qualities in him. But above all he was a great hunter.

"And what," said Rosalind, on the last day of the honeymoon, "did the King do to-day?"

In fact they had been climbing all day; and she had worn a blister on her heel; but she did not mean that.

"To-day," said Ernest, twitching his nose as he bit the end off his cigar, "he chased a hare." He paused; struck a match, and twitched again.

"A woman hare," he added.

"A white hare!" Rosalind exclaimed, as if she had been expecting this. "Rather a small hare; silver grey; with big bright eyes?"

"Yes," said Ernest, looking at her as she had looked at him, "a smallish animal; with eyes popping out of her head, and two little front paws dangling." It was exactly how she sat, with her sewing dangling in her hands; and her eyes, that were so big and bright, were certainly a little prominent.

"Ah, Lapinova," Rosalind murmured.

"Is that what she's called?" said Ernest-"the real Rosalind?" He looked at her. He felt very much in love with her.

"Yes; that's what she's called," said Rosalind. "Lapinova." And before they went to bed that night it was all settled. He was King Lappin; she was Queen Lapinova. They were the opposite of each other; he was bold and determined; she wary and undependable. He ruled over the busy world of rabbits; her world was a desolate, mysterious place, which she ranged mostly by moonlight. All the same, their territories touched; they were King and Queen.

Thus when they came back from their honeymoon they possessed a private world, inhabited, save for the one white hare, entirely by rabbits. No one guessed that there was such a place, and that of course made it all the more amusing. It made them feel, more even than most young married couples, in league together against the rest of the world. Often they looked slyly at each other when people talked about rabbits and woods and traps and shooting. Or they winked furtively across the table when Aunt Mary said that she could never bear to see a hare in a dish-it looked so like a baby: or when John, Ernest's sporting brother, told them what price rabbits were fetching that autumn in Wiltshire, skins and all. Sometimes when they wanted a gamekeeper, or a poacher or a Lord of the Manor, they amused themselves by distributing the parts among their friends. Ernest's mother, Mrs. Reginald Thorburn, for example, fitted the part of the Squire to perfection. But it was all secret-that was the point of it; nobody save themselves knew that such a world existed.

Without that world, how, Rosalind wondered, that winter could she have lived at all? For instance, there was the golden-wedding party, when all the Thorburns assembled at Porchester Terrace to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of that union which had been so blessed-had it not produced Ernest Thorburn? and so fruitful-had it not produced nine other sons and daughters into the bargain, many themselves married and also fruitful? She dreaded that party. But it was inevitable. As she walked upstairs she felt bitterly that she was an only child and an orphan at that; a mere drop among all those Thorburns assembled in the great drawing-room with the shiny satin wallpaper and the lustrous family portraits. The living Thorburns much resembled the painted; save that instead of painted lips they had real lips; out of which came jokes; jokes about schoolrooms, and how they had pulled the chair from under the governess; jokes about frogs and how they had put them between the virgin sheets of maiden ladies. As for herself, she had never even made an apple-pie bed. Holding her present in her hand she advanced toward her mother-in-law sumptuous in yellow satin; and toward her father-in-law decorated with a rich yellow carnation. All round them on tables and chairs there were golden tributes, some nestling in cotton wool; others branching resplendent-candlesticks; cigar boxes; chains; each stamped with the goldsmith's proof that it was solid gold, hall-marked, authentic. But her present was only a little pinchbeck box pierced with holes; an old sand caster, an eighteenth-century relic, once used to sprinkle sand over wet ink. Rather a senseless present she felt-in an age of blotting paper; and as she proffered it, she saw in front of her the stubby black handwriting in which her mother-in-law when they were engaged had expressed the hope that "My son will make you happy." No, she was not happy. Not at all happy. She looked at Ernest, straight as a ramrod with a nose like all the noses in the family portraits; a nose that never twitched at all.

Then they went down to dinner. She was half hidden by the great chrysanthemums that curled their red and gold petals into large tight balls. Everything was gold. A gold-edged card with gold initials intertwined recited the list of all the dishes that would be set one after another before them. She dipped her spoon in a plate of clear golden fluid. The raw white fog outside had been turned by the lamps into a golden mesh that blurred the edges of the plates and gave the pineapples a rough golden skin. Only she herself in her white wedding dress peering ahead of her with her prominent eyes seemed insoluble as an icicle.

As the dinner wore on, however, the room grew steamy with heat. Beads of perspiration stood out on the men's foreheads. She felt that her icicle was being turned to water. She was being melted; dispersed; dissolved into nothingness; and would soon faint. Then through the surge in her head and the din in her ears she heard a woman's voice exclaim, "But they breed so!"

The Thorburns-yes; they breed so, she echoed; looking at all the round red faces that seemed doubled in the giddiness that overcame her; and magnified in the gold mist that enhaloed them. "They breed so." Then John bawled:

"Little devils! . . . Shoot 'em! Jump on 'em with big boots! That's the only way to deal with 'em . . . rabbits!"

At that word, that magic word, she revived. Peeping between the chrysanthemums she saw Ernest's nose twitch. It rippled, it ran with successive twitches. And at that a mysterious catastrophe befell the Thorburns. The golden table became a moor with the gorse in full bloom; the din of voices turned to one peal of lark's laughter ringing down from the sky. It was a blue sky-clouds passed slowly. And they had all been changed-the Thorburns. She looked at her father-in-law, a furtive little man with dyed moustaches. His foible was collecting things-seals, enamel boxes, trifles from eighteenth-century dressing tables which he hid in the drawers of his study from his wife. Now she saw him as he was-a poacher, stealing off with his coat bulging with pheasants and partridges to drop them stealthily into a three-legged pot in his smoky little cottage. That was her real father-in-law-a poacher. And Celia, the unmarried daughter, who always nosed out other people's secrets, the little things they wished to hide-she was a white ferret with pink eyes, and a nose clotted with earth from her horrid underground nosings and pokings. Slung round men's shoulders, in a net, and thrust down a hole-it was a pitiable life-Celia's; it was none of her fault. So she saw Celia. And then she looked at her mother-in-law-whom they dubbed The Squire. Flushed, coarse, a bully-she was all that, as she stood returning thanks, but now that Rosalind-that is Lapinova-saw her, she saw behind her the decayed family mansion, the plaster peeling off the walls, and heard her, with a sob in her voice, giving thanks to her children (who hated her) for a world that had ceased to exist. There was a sudden silence. They all stood with their glasses raised; they all drank; then it was over.

"Oh, King Lappin!" she cried as they went home together in the fog, "if your nose hadn't twitched just at that moment, I should have been trapped!"

"But you're safe," said King Lappin, pressing her paw.

"Quite safe," she answered.

And they drove back through the Park, King and Queen of the marsh, of the mist, and of the gorse-scented moor.

Thus time passed; one year; two years of time. And on a winter's night, which happened by a coincidence to be the anniversary of the golden-wedding party-but Mrs. Reginald Thorburn was dead; the house was to let; and there was only a caretaker in residence-Ernest came home from the office. They had a nice little home; half a house above a saddler's shop in South Kensington, not far from the tube station. It was cold, with fog in the air, and Rosalind was sitting over the fire, sewing.

"What d'you think happened to me to-day?" she began as soon as he had settled himself down with his legs stretched to the blaze. "I was crossing the stream when-"

"What stream?" Ernest interrupted her.

"The stream at the bottom, where our wood meets the black wood," she explained.

Ernest looked completely blank for a moment.

"What the deuce are you talking about?" he asked.

"My dear Ernest!" she cried in dismay. "King Lappin," she added, dangling her little front paws in the firelight. But his nose did not twitch. Her hands-they turned to hands-clutched the stuff she was holding; her eyes popped half out of her head. It took him five minutes at least to change from Ernest Thorburn to King Lappin; and while she waited she felt a load on the back of her neck, as if somebody were about to wring it. At last he changed to King Lappin; his nose twitched; and they spent the evening roaming the woods much as usual.

But she slept badly. In the middle of the night she woke, feeling as if something strange had happened to her. She was stiff and cold. At last she turned on the light and looked at Ernest lying beside her. He was sound asleep. He snored. But even though he snored, his nose remained perfectly still. It looked as if it had never twitched at all. Was it possible that he was really Ernest; and that she was really married to Ernest? A vision of her mother-in-law's dining-room came before her; and there they sat, she and Ernest, grown old, under the engravings, in front of the sideboard. . . . It was their golden-wedding day. She could not bear it.

"Lappin, King Lappin!" she whispered, and for a moment his nose seemed to twitch of its own accord. But he still slept. "Wake up, Lappin, wake up!" she cried.

Ernest woke; and seeing her sitting bolt upright beside him he asked:

"What's the matter?"

"I thought my rabbit was dead!" she whimpered. Ernest was angry.

"Don't talk such rubbish, Rosalind," he said. "Lie down and go to sleep."

He turned over. In another moment he was sound asleep and snoring.

But she could not sleep. She lay curled up on her side of the bed, like a hare in its form. She had turned out the light, but the street lamp lit the ceiling faintly, and the trees outside made a lacy network over it as if there were a shadowy grove on the ceiling in which she wandered, turning, twisting, in and out, round and round, hunting, being hunted, hearing the bay of hounds and horns; flying, escaping . . . until the maid drew the blinds and brought their early tea.

Next day she could settle to nothing. She seemed to have lost something. She felt as if her body had shrunk; it had grown small, and black and hard. Her joints seemed stiff too, and when she looked in the glass, which she did several times as she wandered about the flat, her eyes seemed to burst out of her head, like currants in a bun. The rooms also seemed to have shrunk. Large pieces of furniture jutted out at odd angles and she found herself knocking against them. At last she put on her hat and went out. She walked along the Cromwell Road; and every room she passed and peered into seemed to be a dining-room where people sat eating under steel engravings, with thick yellow lace curtains, and mahogany sideboards. At last she reached the Natural History Museum; she used to like it when she was a child. But the first thing she saw when she went in was a stuffed hare standing on sham snow with pink glass eyes. Somehow it made her shiver all over. Perhaps it would be better when dusk fell. She went home and sat over the fire, without a light, and tried to imagine that she was out alone on a moor; and there was a stream rushing; and beyond the stream a dark wood. But she could get no further than the stream. At last she squatted down on the bank on the wet grass, and sat crouched in her chair, with her hands dangling empty, and her eyes glazed, like glass eyes, in the firelight. Then there was the crack of a gun. . . . She started as if she had been shot. It was only Ernest, turning his key in the door. She waited, trembling. He came in and switched on the light. There he stood, tall, handsome, rubbing his hands that were red with cold.

"Sitting in the dark?" he said.

"Oh, Ernest, Ernest!" she cried, starting up in her chair.

"Well, what's up now?" he asked briskly, warming his hands at the fire.

"It's Lapinova . . ." she faltered, glancing wildly at him out of her great startled eyes. "She's gone, Ernest. I've lost her!"

Ernest frowned. He pressed his lips tight together. "Oh, that's what's up, is it?" he said, smiling rather grimly at his wife. For ten seconds he stood there, silent; and she waited, feeling hands tightening at the back of her neck.

"Yes," he said at length. "Poor Lapinova. . ." He straightened his tie at the looking-glass over the mantelpiece.

"Caught in a trap," he said, "killed," and sat down and read the newspaper.

So that was the end of that marriage.

1939




THE MAN WHO LOVED HIS KIND


Trotting through Deans Yard that afternoon, Prickett Ellis ran straight into Richard Dalloway, or rather, just as they were passing, the covert side glance which each was casting on the other, under his hat, over his shoulder, broadened and burst into recognition; they had not met for twenty years. They had been at school together. And what was Ellis doing? The Bar? Of course, of course-he had followed the case in the papers. But it was impossible to talk here. Wouldn't he drop in that evening. (They lived in the same old place-just round the corner). One or two people were coming. Joynson perhaps. "An awful swell now," said Richard.

"Good-till this evening then," said Richard, and went his way, "jolly glad" (that was quite true) to have met that queer chap, who hadn't changed one bit since he had been at school-just the same knobbly, chubby little boy then, with prejudices sticking out all over him, but uncommonly brilliant-won the Newcastle. Well-off he went.

Prickett Ellis, however, as he turned and looked at Dalloway disappearing, wished now he had not met him or, at least, for he had always liked him personally, hadn't promised to come to this party. Dalloway was married, gave parties; wasn't his sort at all. He would have to dress. However, as the evening drew on, he supposed, as he had said that, and didn't want to be rude, he must go there.

But what an appalling entertainment! There was Joynson; they had nothing to say to each other. He had been a pompous little boy; he had grown rather more self-important-that was all; there wasn't a single other soul in the room that Prickett Ellis knew. Not one. So, as he could not go at once, without saying a word to Dalloway, who seemed altogether taken up with his duties, bustling about in a white waistcoat, there he had to stand. It was the sort of thing that made his gorge rise. Think of grown up, responsible men and women doing this every night of their lives! The lines deepened on his blue and red shaven cheeks as he leant against the wall in complete silence, for though he worked like a horse, he kept himself fit by exercise; and he looked hard and fierce, as if his moustaches were dipped in frost. He bristled; he grated. His meagre dress clothes made him look unkempt, insignificant, angular.

Idle, chattering, overdressed, without an idea in their heads, these fine ladies and gentlemen went on talking and laughing; and Prickett Ellis watched them and compared them with the Brunners who, when they won their case against Fenners' Brewery and got two hundred pounds compensation (it was not half what they should have got) went and spent five of it on a clock for him. That was a decent sort of thing to do; that was the sort of thing that moved one, and he glared more severely than ever at these people, overdressed, cynical, prosperous, and compared what he felt now with what he felt at eleven o'clock that morning when old Brunner and Mrs. Brunner, in their best clothes, awfully respectable and clean looking old people, had called in to give him that small token, as the old man put it, standing perfectly upright to make his speech, of gratitude and respect for the very able way in which you conducted our case, and Mrs. Brunner piped up, how it was all due to him they felt. And they deeply appreciated his generosity-because, of course, he hadn't taken a fee.

And as he took the clock and put it on the middle of his mantelpiece, he had felt that he wished nobody to see his face. That was what he worked for-that was his reward; and he looked at the people who were actually before his eyes as if they danced over that scene in his chambers and were exposed by it, and as it faded-the Brunners faded-there remained as if left of that scene, himself, confronting this hostile population, a perfectly plain, unsophisticated man, a man of the people (he straightened himself) very badly dressed, glaring, with not an air or a grace about him, a man who was an ill hand at concealing his feelings, a plain man, an ordinary human being, pitted against the evil, the corruption, the heartlessness of society. But he would not go on staring. Now he put on his spectacles and examined the pictures. He read the titles on a line of books; for the most part poetry. He would have liked well enough to read some of his old favourites again-Shakespeare, Dickens-he wished he ever had time to turn into the National Gallery, but he couldn't-no, one could not. Really one could not-with the world in the state it was in. Not when people all day long wanted your help, fairly clamoured for help. This wasn't an age for luxuries. And he looked at the arm chairs and the paper knives and the well bound books, and shook his head, knowing that he would never have the time, never he was glad to think have the heart, to afford himself such luxuries. The people here would be shocked if they knew what he paid for his tobacco; how he had borrowed his clothes. His one and only extravagance was his little yacht on the Norfolk Broads. And that he did allow himself, He did like once a year to get right away from everybody and lie on his back in a field. He thought how shocked they would be-these fine folk-if they realized the amount of pleasure he got from what he was old fashioned enough to call the love of nature; trees and fields he had known ever since he was a boy.

These fine people would be shocked. Indeed, standing there, putting his spectacles away in his pocket, he felt himself grow more and more shocking every instant. And it was a very disagreeable feeling. He did not feel this-that he loved humanity, that he paid only fivepence an ounce for tobacco and loved nature-naturally and quietly. Each of these pleasures had been turned into a protest. He felt that these people whom he despised made him stand and deliver and justify himself. "I am an ordinary man," he kept saying. And what he said next he was really ashamed of saying, but he said it. "I have done more for my kind in one day than the rest of you in all your lives." Indeed, he could not help himself; he kept recalling scene after scene, like that when the Brunners gave him the clock-he kept reminding himself of the nice things people had said of his humanity, of his generosity, how he had helped them. He kept seeing himself as the wise and tolerant servant of humanity. And he wished he could repeat his praises aloud. It was unpleasant that the sense of his goodness should boil within him. It was still more unpleasant that he could tell no one what people had said about him. Thank the Lord, he kept saying, I shall be back at work to-morrow; and yet he was no longer satisfied simply to slip through the door and go home. He must stay, he must stay until he had justified himself. But how could he? In all that room full of people, he did not know a soul to speak to.

At last Richard Dalloway came up.

"I want to introduce Miss O'Keefe," he said. Miss O'Keefe looked him full in the eyes. She was a rather arrogant, abrupt mannered woman in the thirties.

Miss O'Keefe wanted an ice or something to drink. And the reason why she asked Prickett Ellis to give it her in what he felt a haughty, unjustifiable manner, was that she had seen a woman and two children, very poor, very tired, pressing against the railings of a square, peering in, that hot afternoon. Can't they be let in? she had thought, her pity rising like a wave; her indignation boiling. No; she rebuked herself the next moment, roughly, as if she boxed her own ears. The whole force of the world can't do it. So she picked up the tennis ball and hurled it back. The whole force of the world can't do it, she said in a fury, and that was why she said so commandingly, to the unknown man:

"Give me an ice."

Long before she had eaten it, Prickett Ellis, standing beside her without taking anything, told her that he had not been to a party for fifteen years; told her that his dress suit was lent him by his brother-in-law; told her that he did not like this sort of thing, and it would have eased him greatly to go on to say that he was a plain man, who happened to have a liking for ordinary people, and then would have told her (and been ashamed of it afterwards) about the Brunners and the clock, but she said:

"Have you seen the Tempest?"

then (for he had not seen the Tempest), had he read some book? Again no, and then, putting her ice down, did he never read poetry?

And Prickett Ellis feeling something rise within him which would decapitate this young woman, make a victim of her, massacre her, made her sit down there, where they would not be interrupted, on two chairs, in the empty garden, for everyone was upstairs, only you could hear a buzz and a hum and a chatter and a jingle, like the mad accompaniment of some phantom orchestra to a cat or two slinking across the grass, and the wavering of leaves, and the yellow and red fruit like Chinese lanterns wobbling this way and that-the talk seemed like a frantic skeleton dance music set to something very real, and full of suffering.

"How beautiful!" said Miss O'Keefe.

Oh, it was beautiful, this little patch of grass, with the towers of Westminster massed round it black, high in the air, after the drawing-room; it was silent, after that noise. After all, they had that-the tired woman, the children.

Prickett Ellis lit a pipe. That would shock her; he filled it with shag tobacco-fivepence halfpenny an ounce. He thought how he would lie in his boat smoking, he could see himself, alone, at night, smoking under the stars. For always to-night he kept thinking how he would look if these people here were to see him. He said to Miss O'Keefe, striking a match on the sole of his boot, that he couldn't see anything particularly beautiful out here.

"Perhaps," said Miss O'Keefe, "you don't care for beauty." (He had told her that he had not seen the Tempest; that he had not read a book; he looked ill-kempt, all moustache, chin, and silver watch chain.) She thought nobody need pay a penny for this; the Museums are free and the National Gallery; and the country. Of course she knew the objections-the washing, cooking, children; but the root of things, what they were all afraid of saying, was that happiness is dirt cheap. You can have it for nothing. Beauty.

Then Prickett Ellis let her have it-this pale, abrupt, arrogant woman. He told her, puffing his shag tobacco, what he had done that day. Up at six; interviews; smelling a drain in a filthy slum; then to court.

Here he hesitated, wishing to tell her something of his own doings. Suppressing that, he was all the more caustic. He said it made him sick to hear well fed, well dressed women (she twitched her lips, for she was thin, and her dress not up to standard) talk of beauty.

"Beauty!" he said. He was afraid he did not understand beauty apart from human beings.

So they glared into the empty garden where the lights were swaying, and one cat hesitating in the middle, its paw lifted.

Beauty apart from human beings? What did he mean by that? she demanded suddenly.

Well this: getting more and more wrought up, he told her the story of the Brunners and the clock, not concealing his pride in it. That was beautiful, he said.

She had no words to specify the horror his story roused in her. First his conceit; then his indecency in talking about human feelings; it was a blasphemy; no one in the whole world ought to tell a story to prove that they had loved their kind. Yet as he told it-how the old man had stood up and made his speech-tears came into her eyes; ah, if any one had ever said that to her! but then again, she felt how it was just this that condemned humanity for ever; never would they reach beyond affecting scenes with clocks; Brunners making speeches to Prickett Ellises, and the Prickett Ellises would always say how they had loved their kind; they would always be lazy, compromising, and afraid of beauty. Hence sprang revolutions; from laziness and fear and this love of affecting scenes. Still this man got pleasure from his Brunners; and she was condemned to suffer for ever and ever from her poor poor women shut out from squares. So they sat silent. Both were very unhappy. For Prickett Ellis was not in the least solaced by what he had said; instead of picking her thorn out he had rubbed it in; his happiness of the morning had been ruined. Miss O'Keefe was muddled and annoyed; she was muddy instead of clear.

"I am afraid I am one of those very ordinary people," he said, getting up, "who love their kind."

Upon which Miss O'Keefe almost shouted: "So do I"

Hating each other, hating the whole houseful of people who had given them this painful, this disillusioning evening, these two lovers of their kind got up, and without a word, parted for ever.

1944




THE SEARCHLIGHT


The mansion of the eighteenth century Earl had been changed in the twentieth century into a Club. And it was pleasant, after dining in the great room with the pillars and the chandeliers under a glare of light to go out on to the balcony overlooking the Park. The trees were in full leaf, and had there been a moon, one could have seen the pink and cream coloured cockades on the chestnut trees. But it was a moonless night; very warm, after a fine summer's day.

Mr. and Mrs. Ivimey's party were drinking coffee and smoking on the balcony. As if to relieve them from the need of talking, to entertain them without any effort on their part, rods of light wheeled across the sky. It was peace then; the air force was practising; searching for enemy aircraft in the sky. After pausing to prod some suspected spot, the light wheeled, like the wings of a windmill, or again like the antennae of some prodigious insect and revealed here a cadaverous stone front; here a chestnut tree with all its blossoms riding; and then suddenly the light struck straight at the balcony, and for a second a bright disc shone-perhaps it was a mirror in a ladies' hand-bag.

"Look!" Mrs. Ivimey exclaimed.

The light passed. They were in darkness again

"You'll never guess what THAT made me see! she added. Naturally, they guessed.

"No, no, no," she protested. Nobody could guess; only she knew; only she could know, because she was the great-grand-daughter of the man himself. He had told her the story. What story? If they liked, she would try to tell it. There was still time before the play.

"But where do I begin?" she pondered. "In the year 1820? . . . It must have been about then that my greatgrandfather was a boy. I'm not young myself"-no, but she was very well set up and handsome-"and he was a very old man when I was a child-when he told me the story. A very handsome old man, with a shock of white hair, and blue eyes. He must have been a beautiful boy. But queer. . . . That was only natural," she explained, "seeing how they lived. The name was Comber. They'd come down in the world. They'd been gentlefolk; they'd owned land up in Yorkshire. But when he was a boy only the tower was left. The house was nothing but a little farmhouse, standing in the middle of fields. We saw it ten years ago and went over it. We had to leave the car and walk across the fields. There isn't any road to the house. It stands all alone, the grass grows right up to the gate . . . there were chickens pecking about, running in and out of the rooms. All gone to rack and ruin. I remember a stone fell from the tower suddenly." She paused. "There they lived," she went on, "the old man, the woman and the boy. She wasn't his wife, or the boy's mother. She was just a farm hand, a girl the old man had taken to live with him when his wife died. Another reason perhaps why nobody visited them-why the whole place was gone to rack and ruin. But I remember a coat of arms over the door; and books, old books, gone mouldy. He taught himself all he knew from books. He read and read, he told me, old books, books with maps hanging out from the pages. He dragged them up to the top of the tower-the rope's still there and the broken steps. There's a chair still in the window with the bottom fallen out; and the window swinging open, and the panes broken, and a view for miles and miles across the moors."

She paused as if she were up in the tower looking from the window that swung open.

"But we couldn't," she said, "find the telescope." In the dining-room behind them the clatter of plates grew louder. But Mrs. Ivimey, on the balcony, seemed puzzled, because she could not find the telescope.

"Why a telescope?" someone asked her.

"Why? Because if there hadn't been a telescope," she laughed, "I shouldn't be sitting here now."

And certainly she was sitting there now, a well set-up, middle-aged woman, with something blue over her shoulders.

"It must have been there," she resumed, "because, he told me, every night when the old people had gone to bed he sat at the window, looking through the telescope at the stars. Jupiter, Aldebaran, Cassiopeia." She waved her hand at the stars that were beginning to show over the trees. It was growing draker. And the searchlight seemed brighter, sweeping across the sky, pausing here and there to stare at the stars.

"There they were," she went on, "the stars. And he asked himself, my great-grandfather-that boy: 'What are they? Why are they? And who am I?' as one does, sitting alone, with no one to talk to, looking at the stars."

She was silent. They all looked at the stars that were coming out in the darkness over the trees. The stars seemed very permanent, very unchanging. The roar of London sank away. A hundred years seemed nothing. They felt that the boy was looking at the stars with them. They seemed to be with him, in the tower, looking out over the moors at the stars.

Then a voice behind them said:

"Right you are. Friday."

They all turned, shifted, felt dropped down on to the balcony again.

"Ah, but there was nobody to say that to him," she murmured. The couple rose and walked away.

"HE was alone," she resumed. "It was a fine summer's day. A June day. One of those perfect summer days when everything seems to stand still in the heat. There were the chickens pecking in the farm-yard; the old horse stamping in the stable; the old man dozing over his glass. The woman scouring pails in the scullery. Perhaps a stone fell from the tower. It seemed as if the day would never end. And he had no one to talk to-nothing whatever to do. The whole world stretched before him. The moor rising and falling; the sky meeting the moor; green and blue, green and blue, for ever and ever."

In the half light, they could see that Mrs. Ivimey was leaning over the balcony, with her chin propped on her hands, as if she were looking out over the moors from the top of a tower.

"Nothing but moor and sky, moor and sky, for ever and ever," she murmured.

Then she made a movement, as if she swung something into position.

"But what did the earth look like through the telescope?" she asked.

She made another quick little movement with her fingers as if she were twirling something.

"He focussed it," she said. "He focussed it upon the earth. He focussed it upon a dark mass of wood upon the horizon. He focussed it so that he could see . . . each tree . . . each tree separate . . . and the birds . . . rising and falling . . . and a stem of smoke . . . there . . . in the midst of the trees. . . . And then . . . lower . . . lower . . . (she lowered her eyes) . . . there was a house . . . a house among the trees . . . a farm-house . . . every brick showed . . . and the tubs on either side of the door . . . with flowers in them blue, pink, hydrangeas, perhaps. . . ." She paused . . . "And then a girl came out of the house . . . wearing something blue upon her head . . . and stood there . . . feeding birds . . . pigeons . . . they came fluttering round her. . . . And then . . . look. . . . A man. . . . A man! He came round the corner. He seized her in his arms! They kissed . . . they kissed."

Mrs. Ivimey opened her arms and closed them as if she were kissing someone.

"It was the first time he had seen a man kiss a woman-in his telescope-miles and miles away across the moors!"

She thrust something from her-the telescope presumably. She sat upright.

"So he ran down the stairs. He ran through the fields. He ran down lanes, out upon the high road, through woods. He ran for miles and miles, and just when the stars were showing above the trees he reached the house . . . covered with dust, streaming with sweat . . . ."

She stopped, as if she saw him.

"And then, and then . . . what did he do then? What did he say? And the girl . . ." they pressed her.

A shaft of light fell upon Mrs. Ivimey as if someone had focussed the lens of a telescope upon her. (It was the air force, looking for enemy air craft.) She had risen. She had something blue on her head. She had raised her hand, as if she stood in a doorway, amazed.

"Oh the girl. . . . She was my-" she hesitated, as if she were about to say "myself." But she remembered; and corrected herself. "She was my great-grand-mother," she said.

She turned to look for her cloak. It was on a chair behind her.

"But tell us-what about the other man, the man who came round the corner?" they asked.

"That man? Oh, that man," Mrs. Ivimey murmured, stooping to fumble with her cloak (the searchlight had left the balcony), "he I suppose, vanished."

"The light," she added, gathering her things about her, "only falls here and there."

The searchlight had passed on. It was now focussed on the plain expanse of Buckingham Palace. And it was time they went on to the play.

1944




THE LEGACY


"For Sissy Miller." Gilbert Clandon, taking up the pearl brooch that lay among a litter of rings and brooches on a little table in his wife's drawing-room, read the inscription: "For Sissy Miller, with my love."

It was like Angela to have remembered even Sissy Miller, her secretary. Yet how strange it was, Gilbert Clandon thought once more, that she had left everything in such order-a little gift of some sort for every one of her friends. It was as if she had foreseen her death. Yet she had been in perfect health when she left the house that morning, six weeks ago; when she stepped off the kerb in Piccadilly and the car had killed her.

He was waiting for Sissy Miller. He had asked her to come; he owed her, he felt, after all the years she had been with them, this token of consideration. Yes, he went on, as he sat there waiting, it was strange that Angela had left everything in such order. Every friend had been left some little token of her affection. Every ring, every necklace, every little Chinese box-she had a passion for little boxes-had a name on it. And each had some memory for him. This he had given her; this

the enamel dolphin with the ruby eyes-she had pounced upon one day in a back street in Venice. He could remember her little cry of delight. To him, of course, she had left nothing in particular, unless it were her diary. Fifteen little volumes, bound in green leather, stood behind him on her writing table. Ever since they were married, she had kept a diary. Some of their very few-he could not call them quarrels, say tiffs-had been about that diary. When he came in and found her writing, she always shut it or put her hand over it. "No, no, no," he could hear her say, "After I'm dead-perhaps." So she had left it him, as her legacy. It was the only thing they had not shared when she was alive. But he had always taken it for granted that she would outlive him. If only she had stopped one moment, and had thought what she was doing, she would be alive now. But she had stepped straight off the kerb, the driver of the car had said at the inquest. She had given him no chance to pull up. . . . Here the sound of voices in the hall interrupted him.

"Miss Miller, Sir," said the maid.

She came in. He had never seen her alone in his life, nor, of course, in tears. She was terribly distressed, and no wonder. Angela had been much more to her than an employer. She had been a friend. To himself, he thought, as he pushed a chair for her and asked her to sit down, she was scarcely distinguishable from any other woman of her kind. There were thousands of Sissy Millers-drab little women in black carrying attache cases. But Angela, with her genius for sympathy, had discovered all sorts of qualities in Sissy Miller. She was the soul of discretion; so silent; so trustworthy, one could tell her anything, and so on.

Miss Miller could not speak at first. She sat there dabbing her eyes with her pocket handkerchief. Then she made an effort.

"Pardon me, Mr. Clandon," she said.

He murmured. Of course he understood. It was only natural. He could guess what his wife had meant to her.

"I've been so happy here," she said, looking round. Her eyes rested on the writing table behind him. It was here they had worked-she and Angela. For Angela had her share of the duties that fall to the lot of a prominent politician's wife. She had been the greatest help to him in his career. He had often seen her and Sissy sitting at that table-Sissy at the typewriter, taking down letters from her dictation. No doubt Miss Miller was thinking of that, too. Now all he had to do was to give her the brooch his wife had left her. A rather incongruous gift it seemed. It might have been better to have left her a sum of money, or even the typewriter. But there it was-"For Sissy Miller, with my love." And, taking the brooch, he gave it her with the little speech that he had prepared. He knew, he said, that she would value it. His wife had often worn it. . . . And she replied, as she took it almost as if she too had prepared a speech, that it would always be a treasured possession. . . . She had, he supposed, other clothes upon which a pearl brooch would not look quite so incongruous. She was wearing the little black coat and skirt that seemed the uniform of her profession. Then he remembered-she was in mourning, of course. She, too, had had her tragedy-a brother, to whom she was devoted, had died only a week or two before Angela. In some accident was it? He could not remember-only Angela telling him. Angela, with her genius for sympathy, had been terribly upset. Meanwhile Sissy Miller had risen. She was putting on her gloves. Evidently she felt that she ought not to intrude. But he could not let her go without saying something about her future. What were her plans? Was there any way in which he could help her?

She was gazing at the table, where she had sat at her typewriter, where the diary lay. And, lost in her memories of Angela, she did not at once answer his suggestion that he should help her. She seemed for a moment not to understand. So he repeated:

"What are your plans, Miss Miller?"

"My plans? Oh, that's all right, Mr. Clandon," she exclaimed. "Please don't bother yourself about me."

He took her to mean that she was in no need of financial assistance. It would be better, he realized, to make any suggestion of that kind in a letter. All he could do now was to say as he pressed her hand, "Remember, Miss Miller, if there's any way in which I can help you, it will be a pleasure. . . ." Then he opened the door. For a moment, on the threshold, as if a sudden thought had struck her, she stopped.

"Mr. Clandon," she said, looking straight at him for the first time, and for the first time he was struck by the expression, sympathetic yet searching, in her eyes. "If at any time," she continued, "there's anything I can do to help you, remember, I shall feel it, for your wife's sake, a pleasure . . ."

With that she was gone. Her words and the look that went with them were unexpected. It was almost as if she believed, or hoped, that he would need her. A curious, perhaps a fantastic idea occurred to him as he returned to his chair. Could it be, that during all those years when he had scarcely noticed her, she, as the novelists say, had entertained a passion for him? He caught his own reflection in the glass as he passed. He was over fifty; but he could not help admitting that he was still, as the looking-glass showed him, a very distinguished-looking man.

"Poor Sissy Miller!" he said, half laughing. How he would have liked to share that joke with his wife! He turned instinctively to her diary. "Gilbert," he read, opening it at random, "looked so wonderful. . . ." It was as if she had answered his question. Of course, she seemed to say, you're very attractive to women. Of course Sissy Miller felt that too. He read on. "How proud I am to be his wife!" And he had always been very proud to be her husband. How often, when they dined out somewhere, he had looked at her across the table and said to himself, She is the loveliest woman here! He read on. That first year he had been standing for Parliament. They had toured his constituency. "When Gilbert sat down the applause was terrific. The whole audience rose and sang: 'For he's a jolly good fellow.' I was quite overcome." He remembered that, too. She had been sitting on the platform beside him. He could still see the glance she cast at him, and how she had tears in her eyes. And then? He turned the pages. They had gone to Venice. He recalled that happy holiday after the election. "We had ices at Florians." He smiled-she was still such a child; she loved ices. "Gilbert gave me a most interesting account of the history of Venice. He told me that the Doges. . ." she had written it all out in her schoolgirl hand. One of the delights of travelling with Angela had been that she was so eager to learn. She was so terribly ignorant, she used to say, as if that were not one of her charms. And then-he opened the next volume-they had come back to London. "I was so anxious to make a good impression. I wore my wedding dress." He could see her now sitting next old Sir Edward; and making a conquest of that formidable old man, his chief. He read on rapidly, filling in scene after scene from her scrappy fragments. "Dined at the House of Commons. . . . To an evening party at the Lovegroves. Did I realize my responsibility, Lady L. asked me, as Gilbert's wife?" Then, as the years passed-he took another volume from the writing table-he had become more and more absorbed in his work. And she, of course, was more often alone. . . . It had been a great grief to her, apparently, that they had had no children. "How I wish," one entry read, "that Gilbert had a son!" Oddly enough he had never much regretted that himself. Life had been so full, so rich as it was. That year he had been given a minor post in the government. A minor post only, but her comment was: "I am quite certain now that he will be Prime Minister!" Well, if things had gone differently, it might have been so. He paused here to speculate upon what might have been. Politics was a gamble, he reflected; but the game wasn't over yet. Not at fifty. He cast his eyes rapidly over more pages, full of the little trifles, the insignificant, happy, daily trifles that had made up her life.

He took up another volume and opened it at random. "What a coward I am! I let the chance slip again. But it seemed selfish to bother him with my own affairs, when he has so much to think about. And we so seldom have an evening alone." What was the meaning of that? Oh, here was the explanation-it referred to her work in the East End. "I plucked up courage and talked to Gilbert at last. He was so kind, so good. He made no objection." He remembered that conversation. She had told him that she felt so idle, so useless. She wished to have some work of her own. She wanted to do something-she had blushed so prettily, he remembered, as she said it, sitting in that very chair-to help others. He had bantered her a little. Hadn't she enough to do looking after him, after her home? Still, if it amused her, of course he had no objection. What was it? Some district? Some committee? Only she must promise not to make herself ill. So it seemed that every Wednesday she went to Whitechapel. He remembered how he hated the clothes she wore on those occasions. But she had taken it very seriously, it seemed. The diary was full of references like this: "Saw Mrs. Jones. . . She has ten children. . . . Husband lost his arm in an accident. . . . Did my best to find a job for Lily." He skipped on. His own name occurred less frequently. His interest slackened. Some of the entries conveyed nothing to him. For example: "Had a heated argument about socialism with B. M." Who was B. M.? He could not fill in the initials; some woman, he supposed, that she had met on one of her committees. "B. M. made a violent attack upon the upper classes. . . . I walked back after the meeting with B. M. and tried to convince him. But he is so narrow-minded." So B. M. was a man-no doubt one of those "intellectuals," as they call themselves, who are so violent, as Angela said, and so narrow-minded. She had invited him to come and see her apparently. "B. M. came to dinner. He shook hands with Minnie!" That note of exclamation gave another twist to his mental picture. B. M., it seemed, wasn't used to parlour-maids; he had shaken hands with Minnie. Presumably he was one of those tame working men who air their views in ladies' drawing-rooms. Gilbert knew the type, and had no liking for this particular specimen, whoever B. M. might be. Here he was again. "Went with B. M. to the Tower of London. . . . He said revolution is bound to come . . . He said we live in a Fool's Paradise." That was just the kind of thing B. M. would say-Gilbert could hear him. He could also see him quite distinctly-a stubby little man, with a rough beard, red tie, dressed as they always did in tweeds, who had never done an honest day's work in his life. Surely Angela had the sense to see through him? He read on. "B. M. said some very disagreeable things about-" The name was carefully scratched out. "I told him I would not listen to any more abuse of-" Again the name was obliterated. Could it have been his own name? Was that why Angela covered the page so quickly when he came in? The thought added to his growing dislike of B.M. He had had the impertinence to discuss him in this very room. Why had Angela never told him? It was very unlike her to conceal anything; she had been the soul of candour. He turned the pages, picking out every reference to B. M. "B. M. told me the story of his childhood. His mother went out charring . . . When I think of it, I can hardly bear to go on living in such luxury. . . . Three guineas for one hat!" If only she had discussed the matter with him, instead of puzzling her poor little head about questions that were much too difficult for her to understand! He had lent her books. KARL MARX, THE COMING REVOLUTION. The initials B.M., B. M., B. M., recurred repeatedly. But why never the full name? There was an informality, an intimacy in the use of initials that was very unlike Angela. Had she called him B. M. to his face? He read on. "B. M. came unexpectedly after dinner. Luckily, I was alone." That was only a year ago. "Luckily"-why luckily?-"I was alone." Where had he been that night? He checked the date in his engagement book. It had been the night of the Mansion House dinner. And B. M. and Angela had spent the evening alone! He tried to recall that evening. Was she waiting up for him when he came back? Had the room looked just as usual? Were there glasses on the table? Were the chairs drawn close together? He could remember nothing-nothing whatever, nothing except his own speech at the Mansion House dinner. It became more and more inexplicable to him-the whole situation; his wife receiving an unknown man alone. Perhaps the next volume would explain. Hastily he reached for the last of the diaries-the one she had left unfinished when she died. There, on the very first page, was that cursed fellow again. "Dined alone with B.M. . . . He became very agitated. He said it was time we understood each other. . . . I tried to make him listen. But he would not. He threatened that if I did not . . ." the rest of the page was scored over. She had written "Egypt. Egypt. Egypt," over the whole page. He could not make out a single word; but there could be only one interpretation: the scoundrel had asked her to become his mistress. Alone in his room! The blood rushed to Gilbert Clandon's face. He turned the pages rapidly. What had been her answer? Initials had ceased. It was simply "he" now. "He came again. I told him I could not come to any decision. . . . I implored him to leave me." He had forced himself upon her in this very house. But why hadn't she told him? How could she have hesitated for an instant? Then: "I wrote him a letter." Then pages were left blank. Then there was this: "No answer to my letter." Then more blank pages; and then this: "He has done what he threatened." After that-what came after that? He turned page after page. All were blank. But there, on the very day before her death, was this entry: "Have I the courage to do it too?" That was the end.

Gilbert Clandon let the book slide to the floor. He could see her in front of him. She was standing on the kerb in Piccadilly. Her eyes stared; her fists were clenched. Here came the car. . . .

He could not bear it. He must know the truth. He strode to the telephone.

"Miss Miller!" There was silence. Then he heard someone moving in the room.

"Sissy Miller speaking"-her voice at last answered him.

"Who," he thundered, "is B. M.?"

He could hear the cheap clock ticking on her mantelpiece; then a long drawn sigh. Then at last she said:

"He was my brother."

He WAS her brother; her brother who had killed himself. "Is there," he heard Sissy Miller asking, "anything that I can explain?"

"Nothing!" he cried. "Nothing!"

He had received his legacy. She had told him the truth. She had stepped off the kerb to rejoin her lover. She had stepped off the kerb to escape from him.

1944




TOGETHER AND APART


Mrs. Dalloway introduced them, saying you will like him. The conversation began some minutes before anything was said, for both Mr. Serle and Miss Arming looked at the sky and in both of their minds the sky went on pouring its meaning though very differently, until the presence of Mr. Serle by her side became so distinct to Miss Anning that she could not see the sky, simply, itself, any more, but the sky shored up by the tall body, dark eyes, grey hair, clasped hands, the stern melancholy (but she had been told "falsely melancholy") face of Roderick Serle, and, knowing how foolish it was, she yet felt impelled to say:

"What a beautiful night!"

Foolish! Idiotically foolish! But if one mayn't be foolish at the age of forty in the presence of the sky, which makes the wisest imbecile-mere wisps of straw-she and Mr. Serle atoms, motes, standing there at Mrs. Dalloway's window, and their lives, seen by moonlight, as long as an insect's and no more important.

"Well!" said Miss Anning, patting the sofa cushion emphatically. And down he sat beside her. Was he "falsely melancholy," as they said? Prompted by the sky, which seemed to make it all a little futile-what they said, what they did-she said something perfectly commonplace again:

"There was a Miss Serle who lived at Canterbury when I was a girl there."

With the sky in his mind, all the tombs of his ancestors immediately appeared to Mr. Serle in a blue romantic light, and his eyes expanding and darkening, he said: "Yes.

"We are originally a Norman family, who came over with the Conqueror. That is a Richard Serle buried in the Cathedral. He was a knight of the garter."

Miss Arming felt that she had struck accidentally the true man, upon whom the false man was built. Under the influence of the moon (the moon which symbolized man to her, she could see it through a chink of the curtain, and she took dips of the moon) she was capable of saying almost anything and she settled in to disinter the true man who was buried under the false, saying to herself: "On, Stanley, on"-which was a watchword of hers, a secret spur, or scourge such as middle-aged people often make to flagellate some inveterate vice, hers being a deplorable timidity, or rather indolence, for it was not so much that she lacked courage, but lacked energy, especially in talking to men, who frightened her rather, and so often her talks petered out into dull commonplaces, and she had very few men friends-very few intimate friends at all, she thought, but after all, did she want them? No. She had Sarah, Arthur, the cottage, the chow and, of course THAT, she thought, dipping herself, sousing herself, even as she sat on the sofa beside Mr. Serle, in THAT, in the sense she had coming home of something collected there, a cluster of miracles, which she could not believe other people had (since it was she only who had Arthur, Sarah, the cottage, and the chow), but she soused herself again in the deep satisfactory possession, feeling that what with this and the moon (music that was, the moon), she could afford to leave this man and that pride of his in the Serles buried. No! That was the danger-she must not sink into torpidity-not at her age. "On, Stanley, on," she said to herself, and asked him:

"Do you know Canterbury yourself?"

Did he know Canterbury! Mr. Serle smiled, thinking how absurd a question it was-how little she knew, this nice quiet woman who played some instrument and seemed intelligent and had good eyes, and was wearing a very nice old necklace-knew what it meant. To be asked if he knew Canterbury. When the best years of his life, all his memories, things he had never been able to tell anybody, but had tried to write-ah, had tried to write (and he sighed) all had centred in Canterbury; it made him laugh.

His sigh and then his laugh, his melancholy and his humour, made people like him, and he knew it, and yet being liked had not made up for the disappointment, and if he sponged on the liking people had for him (paying long calls on sympathetic ladies, long, long calls), it was half bitterly, for he had never done a tenth part of what he could have done, and had dreamed of doing, as a boy in Canterbury. With a stranger he felt a renewal of hope because they could not say that he had not done what he had promised, and yielding to his charm would give him a fresh start-at fifty! She had touched the spring. Fields and flowers and grey buildings dripped down into his mind, formed silver drops on the gaunt, dark walls of his mind and dripped down. With such an image his poems often began. He felt the desire to make images now, sitting by this quiet woman.

"Yes, I know Canterbury," he said reminiscently, sentimentally, inviting, Miss Anning felt, discreet questions, and that was what made him interesting to so many people, and it was this extraordinary facility and responsiveness to talk on his part that had been his undoing, so he thought often, taking his studs out and putting his keys and small change on the dressing-table after one of these parties (and he went out sometimes almost every night in the season), and, going down to breakfast, becoming quite different, grumpy, unpleasant at breakfast to his wife, who was an invalid, and never went out, but had old friends to see her sometimes, women friends for the most part, interested in Indian philosophy and different cures and different doctors, which Roderick Serle snubbed off by some caustic remark too clever for her to meet, except by gentle expostulations and a tear or two-he had failed, he often thought, because he could not cut himself off utterly from society and the company of women, which was so necessary to him, and write. He had involved himself too deep in life-and here he would cross his knees (all his movements were a little unconventional and distinguished) and not blame himself, but put the blame off upon the richness of his nature, which he compared favourably with Wordsworth's, for example, and, since he had given so much to people, he felt, resting his head on his hands, they in their turn should help him, and this was the prelude, tremulous, fascinating, exciting, to talk; and images bubbled up in his mind.

"She's like a fruit tree-like a flowering cherry tree," he said, looking at a youngish woman with fine white hair. It was a nice sort of image, Ruth Anning thought-rather nice, yet she did not feel sure that she liked this distinguished, melancholy man with his gestures; and it's odd, she thought, how one's feelings are influenced. She did not like HIM, though she rather liked that comparison of his of a woman to a cherry tree. Fibres of her were floated capriciously this way and that, like the tentacles of a sea anemone, now thrilled, now snubbed, and her brain, miles away, cool and distant, up in the air, received messages which it would sum up in time so that, when people talked about Roderick Serle (and he was a bit of a figure) she would say unhesitatingly: "I like him," or "I don't like him," and her opinion would be made up for ever. An odd thought; a solemn thought; throwing a green light on what human fellowship consisted of.

"It's odd that you should know Canterbury," said Mr. Serle. "It's always a shock," he went on (the white-haired lady having passed), "when one meets someone" (they had never met before), "by chance, as it were, who touches the fringe of what has meant a great deal to oneself, touches accidentally, for I suppose Canterbury was nothing but a nice old town to you. So you stayed there one summer with an aunt?" (That was all Ruth Anning was going to tell him about her visit to Canterbury.) "And you saw the sights and went away and never thought of it again."

Let him think so; not liking him, she wanted him to run away with an absurd idea of her. For really, her three months in Canterbury had been amazing. She remembered to the last detail, though it was merely a chance visit, going to see Miss Charlotte Serle, an acquaintance of her aunt's. Even now she could repeat Miss Serle's very words about the thunder. "Whenever I wake, or hear thunder in the night, I think 'Someone has been killed'." And she could see the hard, hairy, diamond-patterned carpet, and the twinkling, suffused, brown eyes of the elderly lady, holding the teacup out unfilled, while she said that about the thunder. And always she saw Canterbury, all thundercloud and livid apple blossom, and the long grey backs of the buildings.

The thunder roused her from her plethoric middle-aged swoon of indifference; "On, Stanley, on," she said to herself; that is, this man shall not glide away from me, like everybody else, on this false assumption; I will tell him the truth.

"I loved Canterbury," she said.

He kindled instantly. It was his gift, his fault, his destiny.

"Loved it," he repeated. "I can see that you did."

Her tentacles sent back the message that Roderick Serle was nice.

Their eyes met; collided rather, for each felt that behind the eyes the secluded being, who sits in darkness while his shallow agile companion does all the tumbling and beckoning, and keeps the show going, suddenly stood erect; flung off his cloak; confronted the other. It was alarming; it was terrific. They were elderly and burnished into a glowing smoothness, so that Roderick Serle would go, perhaps to a dozen parties in a season, and feel nothing out of the common, or only sentimental regrets, and the desire for pretty images-like this of the flowering cherry tree-and all the time there stagnated in him unstirred a sort of superiority to his company, a sense of untapped resources, which sent him back home dissatisfied with life, with himself, yawning, empty, capricious. But now, quite suddenly, like a white bolt in a mist (but this image forged itself with the inevitability of lightning and loomed up), there it had happened; the old ecstasy of life; its invincible assault; for it was unpleasant, at the same time that it rejoiced and rejuvenated and filled the veins and nerves with threads of ice and fire; it was terrifying. "Canterbury twenty years ago," said Miss Anning, as one lays a shade over an intense light, or covers some burning peach with a green leaf, for it is too strong, too ripe, too full.

Sometimes she wished she had married. Sometimes the cool peace of middle life, with its automatic devices for shielding mind and body from bruises, seemed to her, compared with the thunder and the livid apple-blossom of Canterbury, base. She could imagine something different, more like lightning, more intense. She could imagine some physical sensation. She could imagine-

And, strangely enough, for she had never seen him before, her senses, those tentacles which were thrilled and snubbed, now sent no more messages, now lay quiescent, as if she and Mr. Serle knew each other so perfectly, were, in fact, so closely united that they had only to float side by side down this stream.

Of all things, nothing is so strange as human intercourse, she thought, because of its changes, its extraordinary irrationality, her dislike being now nothing short of the most intense and rapturous love, but directly the word "love" occurred to her, she rejected it, thinking again how obscure the mind was, with its very few words for all these astonishing perceptions, these alternations of pain and pleasure. For how did one name this. That is what she felt now, the withdrawal of human affection, Serle's disappearance, and the instant need they were both under to cover up what was so desolating and degrading to human nature that everyone tried to bury it decently from sight-this withdrawal, this violation of trust, and, seeking some decent acknowledged and accepted burial form, she said:

"Of course, whatever they may do, they can't spoil Canterbury."

He smiled; he accepted it; he crossed his knees the other way about. She did her part; he his. So things came to an end. And over them both came instantly that paralysing blankness of feeling, when nothing bursts from the mind, when its walls appear like slate; when vacancy almost hurts, and the eyes petrified and fixed see the same spot-a pattern, a coal scuttle-with an exactness which is terrifying, since no emotion, no idea, no impression of any kind comes to change it, to modify it, to embellish it, since the fountains of feeling seem sealed and as the mind turns rigid, so does the body; stark, statuesque, so that neither Mr. Serle nor Miss Anning could move or speak, and they felt as if an enchanter had freed them, and spring flushed every vein with streams of life, when Mira Cartwright, tapping Mr. Serle archly on the shoulder, said:

"I saw you at the Meistersinger, and you cut me. Villain," said Miss Cartwright, "you don't deserve that I should ever speak to you again."

And they could separate.

1944




A SUMMING UP


Since it had grown hot and crowded indoors, since there could be no danger on a night like this of damp, since the Chinese lanterns seemed hung red and green fruit in the depths of an enchanted forest, Mr. Bertram Pritchard led Mrs. Latham into the garden.

The open air and the sense of being out of doors bewildered Sasha Latham, the tall, handsome, rather indolent looking lady, whose majesty of presence was so great that people never credited her with feeling perfectly inadequate and gauche when she had to say something at a party. But so it was; and she was glad that she was with Bertram, who could be trusted, even out of doors, to talk without stopping. Written down what he said would be incredible-not only was each thing he said in itself insignificant, but there was no connection between the different remarks. Indeed, if one had taken a pencil and written down his very words-and one night of his talk would have filled a whole book-no one could doubt, reading them, that the poor man was intellectually deficient. This was far from the case, for Mr. Pritchard was an esteemed civil servant and a Companion of the Bath; but what was even stranger was that he was almost invariably liked. There was a sound in his voice, some accent of emphasis, some lustre in the incongruity of his ideas, some emanation from his round, cubbby brown face and robin redbreast's figure, something immaterial, and unseizable, which existed and flourished and made itself felt independently of his words, indeed, often in opposition to them. Thus Sasha Latham would be thinking while he chattered on about his tour in Devonshire, about inns and landladies, about Eddie and Freddie, about cows and night travelling, about cream and stars, about continental railways and Bradshaw, catching cod, catching cold, influenza, rheumatism and Keats-she was thinking of him in the abstract as a person whose existence was good, creating him as he spoke in the guise that was different from what he said, and was certainly the true Bertram Pritchard, even though one could not prove it. How could one prove that he was a loyal friend and very sympathetic and-but here, as so often happened, talking to Bertram Pritchard, she forgot his existence, and began to think of something else.

It was the night she thought of, hitching herself together in some way, taking a look up into the sky. It was the country she smelt suddenly, the sombre stillness of fields under the stars, but here, in Mrs. Dalloway's back garden, in Westminster, the beauty, country born and bred as she was, thrilled her because of the contrast presumably; there the smell of hay in the air and behind her the rooms full of people. She walked with Bertram; she walked rather like a stag, with a little give of the ankles, fanning herself, majestic, silent, with all her senses roused, her ears pricked, snuffing the air, as if she had been some wild, but perfectly controlled creature taking its pleasure by night.

This, she thought, is the greatest of marvels; the supreme achievement of the human race. Where there were osier beds and coracles paddling through a swamp, there is this; and she thought of the dry, thick, well built house stored with valuables, humming with people coming close to each other, going away from each other, exchanging their views, stimulating each other. And Clarissa Dalloway had made it open in the wastes of the night, had laid paving stones over the bog, and, when they came to the end of the garden (it was in fact extremely small), and she and Bertram sat down on deck chairs, she looked at the house veneratingly, enthusiastically, as if a golden shaft ran through her and tears formed on it and fell in profound thanksgiving. Shy though she was and almost incapable when suddenly presented to someone of saying anything, fundamentally humble, she cherished a profound admiration for other people. To be them would be marvellous, but she was condemned to be herself and could only in this silent enthusiastic way, sitting outside in a garden, applaud the society of humanity from which she was excluded. Tags of poetry in praise of them rose to her lips; they were adorable and good, above all courageous, triumphers over night and fens, the survivors, the company of adventurers who, set about with dangers, sail on.

By some malice of fate she was unable to join, but she could sit and praise while Bertram chattered on, he being among the voyagers, as cabin boy or common seaman-someone who ran up masts, gaily whistling. Thinking thus, the branch of some tree in front of her became soaked and steeped in her admiration for the people of the house; dripped gold; or stood sentinel erect. It was part of the gallant and carousing company a mast from which the flag streamed. There was a barrel of some kind against the wall, and this, too, she endowed.

Suddenly Bertram, who was restless physically, wanted to explore the grounds, and, jumping on to a heap of bricks he peered over the garden wall. Sasha peered over too. She saw a bucket or perhaps a boot. In a second the illusion vanished. There was London again; the vast inattentive impersonal world; motor omnibuses; affairs; lights before public houses; and yawning policemen.

Having satisfied his curiosity, and replenished, by a moment's silence, his bubbling fountains of talk, Bertram invited Mr. and Mrs. Somebody to sit with them, pulling up two more chairs. There they sat again, looking at the same house, the same tree, the same barrel; only having looked over the wall and had a glimpse of the bucket, or rather of London going its ways unconcernedly, Sasha could no longer spray over the world that cloud of gold. Bertram talked and the somebodies-for the life of her she could not remember if they were called Wallace or Freeman-answered, and all their words passed through a thin haze of gold and fell into prosaic daylight. She looked at the dry, thick Queen Anne House; she did her best to remember what she had read at school about the Isle of Thorney and men in coracles, oysters, and wild duck and mists, but it seemed to her a logical affair of drains and carpenters, and this party-nothing but people in evening dress.

Then she asked herself, which view is the true one? She could see the bucket and the house half lit up, half unlit.

She asked this question of that somebody whom, in her humble way, she had composed out of the wisdom and power of other people. The answer came often by accident-she had known her old spaniel answer by wagging his tail.

Now the tree, denuded of its gilt and majesty, seemed to supply her with an answer; became a field tree-the only one in a marsh. She had often seen it; seen the red-flushed clouds between its branches, or the moon split up, darting irregular flashes of silver. But what answer? Well that the soul-for she was conscious of a movement in her of some creature beating its way about her and trying to escape which momentarily she called the soul-is by nature unmated, a widow bird; a bird perched aloof on that tree.

But then Bertram, putting his arm through hers in his familiar way, for he had known her all her life, remarked that they were not doing their duty and must go in.

At that moment, in some back street or public house, the usual terrible sexless, inarticulate voice rang out; a shriek, a cry. And the widow bird, startled, flew away, describing wider and wider circles until it became (what she called her soul) remote as a crow which has been startled up into the air by a stone thrown at it.

1944
SLAUGHTERHOUSE-FIVE

OR THE CHILDREN'S
CRUSADE
A Duty-dance with Death

KURT VONNEGUT, JR.

A fourth-generation German-American
now living in easy circumstances
on Cape Cod
[and smoking too much],
who, as an American infantry scout
hors de combat,
as a prisoner of war,
witnessed the fire-bombing of Dresden, Germany,
'The Florence of the Elbe,'
a long time ago,
and survived to tell the tale.
This is a novel
somewhat in the telegraphic schizophrenic
manner of tales
of the planet Tralfamadore,
where the flying saucers
come from.
Peace.



for
Mary OHare
and
Gerhard Mller





The cattle are lowing,
The Baby awakes,
But the little Lord Jesus
No crying He makes.









One

All this happened, more or less. The war parts, anyway, are pretty much true. One guy I knew really was shot in Dresden for taking a teapot that wasn't his. Another guy I knew really did threaten to have his personal enemies killed by hired gunmen after the war. And so on. I've changed all the names.
    I really did go back to Dresden with Guggenheim money (God love it) in 1967. It looked a lot like Dayton, Ohio, more open spaces than Dayton has. There must be tons of human bone meal in the ground.
    I went back there with an old war buddy, Bernard V. O'Hare, and we made friends with a taxi driver, who took us to the slaughterhouse where we had been locked up at night as prisoner of war. His name was Gerhard Mller. He told us that he was a prisoner of the Americans for a while. We asked him how it was to live under Communism, and he said that it was terrible at first, because everybody had to work so hard, and because there wasn't much shelter or food or clothing. But things were much better now. He had a pleasant little apartment, and his daughter was getting an excellent education. His mother was incinerated in the Dresden fire-storm. So it goes.
    He sent O'Hare a postcard at Christmastime, and here is what it said:
    'I wish you and your family also as to your friend Merry Christmas and a happy New Year and I hope that we'll meet again in a world of peace and freedom in the taxi cab if the accident will.'
    I like that very much: 'If the accident will.'
    I would hate to tell you what this lousy little book cost me in money and anxiety and time. When I got home from the Second World War twenty-three years ago, I thought it would be easy for me to write about the destruction of Dresden, since all I would have to do would be to report what I had seen. And I thought, too, that it would be a masterpiece or at least make me a lot of money, since the subject was so big.
    But not many words about Dresden came from my mind then-not enough of them to make a book, anyway. And not many words come now, either, when I have become an old fart with his memories and his Pall Malls, with his sons full grown. I think of how useless the Dresden -part of my memory has been, and yet how tempting Dresden has been to write about, and I am reminded of the famous limerick:

There was a young man from Stamboul,
Who soliloquized thus to his tool,
'You took all my wealth
And you ruined my health,
And now you won't pee, you old fool

    And I'm reminded, too, of the song that goes

My name is Yon Yonson,
I work in Wisconsin,
I work in a lumbermill there.
The people I meet when I walk down the street,
They say, 'What's your name?
And I say,
My name is Yon Yonson,
I work in Wisconsin...

    And so on to infinity.
    Over the years, people I've met have often asked me what I'm working on, and I've usually replied that the main thing was a book about Dresden.
    I said that to Harrison Starr, the movie-maker, one time, and he raised his eyebrows and inquired, 'Is it an anti-war book?'
    'Yes,' I said. 'I guess.'
    'You know what I say to people when I hear they're writing anti-war books?'
'No. What do you say, Harrison Starr?'
'I say, "Why don't you write an anti-glacier book instead?"'
What he meant, of course, was that there would always be wars, that they were as easy to stop as glaciers. I believe that too.

    And, even if wars didn't keep coming like glaciers, there would still be plain old death.

    When I was somewhat younger, working on my famous Dresden book, I asked an old war buddy named Bernard V. O'Hare if I could come to see him. He was a district attorney in Pennsylvania. I was a writer on Cape Cod. We had been privates in the war, infantry scouts. We had never expected to make any money after the war, but we were doing quite well.
    I had the Bell Telephone Company find him for me. They are wonderful that way. I have this, disease late at night sometimes, involving alcohol and the telephone. I get drunk, and I drive my wife away with a breath like mustard gas and roses. And then, speaking gravely and elegantly into the telephone, I ask the telephone operators to connect me with this friend or that one, from whom I have not heard in years.
    I got O'Hare on the line in this way. He is short and I am tall. We were Mutt and Jeff in the war. We were captured together in the war. I told him who I was on the telephone. He had no trouble believing it. He was up. He was reading. Everybody else in his house was asleep.
    'Listen,' I said, 'I'm writing this book about Dresden. I'd like some help remembering stuff. I wonder if I could come down and see you, and we could drink and talk and remember.'
    He was unenthusiastic. He said he couldn't remember much. He told me, though, to come ahead.
    'I think the climax of the book will be the execution of poor old Edgar Derby,' I said. 'The irony is so great. A whole city gets burned down, and thousands and thousands of people are killed. And then this one American foot soldier is arrested in the ruins for taking a teapot. And he's given a regular trial, and then he's shot by a firing squad.'
    'Um,' said O'Hare.
    'Don't you think that's really where the climax should come?' 'I don't know anything about it,' he said. 'That's your trade, not mine.'

    As a trafficker in climaxes and thrills and characterization and wonderful dialogue and suspense and confrontations, I had outlined the Dresden story many times. The best outline I ever made, or anyway the prettiest one, was on the back of a roll of wallpaper.
    I used my daughter's crayons, a different color for each main character. One end of the wallpaper was the beginning of the story, and the other end was the end, and then there was all that middle part, which was the middle. And the blue line met the red line and then the yellow line, and the yellow line stopped because the character represented by the yellow line was dead. And so on. The destruction of Dresden was represented by a vertical band of orange cross-hatching, and all the lines that were still alive passed through it, came out the other side.
    The end, where all the lines stopped, was a beetfield on the Elbe, outside of Halle. The rain was coming down. The war in Europe had been over for a couple of weeks. We were formed in ranks, with Russian soldiers guarding us-Englishmen, Americans, Dutchmen, Belgians, Frenchmen, Canadians, South Africans, New Zealanders, Australians, thousands of us about to stop being prisoners of war.
    And on the other side of the field were thousands of Russians and Poles and Yugoslavians and so on guarded by American soldiers. An exchange was made there in the rain-one for one. O'Hare and I climbed into the back of an American truck with a lot of others. O'Hare didn't have any souvenirs. Almost everybody else did. I had a ceremonial Luftwaffe saber, still do. The rabid little American I call Paul Lazzaro in this book had about a quart of diamonds and emeralds and rubies and so on' He had taken these from dead people in the cellars of Dresden.' So it goes.
    An idiotic Englishman, who had lost all his teeth somewhere had his souvenir in a canvas bag. The bag was resting on my insteps. He would peek into the bag every now and then, and he would roll his eyes and swivel his scrawny neck,, trying to catch people looking covetously at his bag. And he would bounce the bag on my insteps.
I thought this bouncing was accidental. But I was mistaken. He had to show somebody what was in the bag, and he had decided he could trust me. He caught my eye, winked, opened the bag. There was a plaster model of the Eiffel Tower in there. It was painted gold. It had a clock in it.
    'There's a smashin' thing,' he said.

    And we were flown to a rest camp in France, where we were fed chocolate malted milkshakes and other rich foods until we were all covered with baby fat. Then we were sent home, and I married a pretty girl who was covered with baby fat, too.
    And we had babies.
    And they're all grown up now, and I'm an old fart with his memories and his Pall Malls. My name is Yon Yonson, I work in Wisconsin, I work in a lumbermill there.
    Sometimes I try to call up old girl friends on the telephone late at night, after my wife has gone to bed. 'Operator, I wonder if you could give me the number of a Mrs. So-and-So. I think she lives at such-and-such.'
    'I'm sorry, sir. There is no such listing.'
'Thanks, Operator. Thanks just the same.'
    And I let the dog out or I let him in, and we talk some. I let him know I like him, and he lets me know he likes me. He doesn't mind the smell of mustard gas and roses.
    'You're all right, Sandy, I'll say to the dog. 'You know that, Sandy? You're O.K.'
    Sometimes I'll turn on the radio and listen to a talk program from Boston or New York.  I can't stand recorded music if I've been drinking a good deal.
    Sooner or later I go to bed, and my wife asks me what time it is. She always has to know the time. Sometimes I don't know, and I say, 'Search me.'

    I think about my education sometimes. I went to the University of Chicago for a while after the Second World War. I was a student in the Department of Anthropology. At that time, they were teaching that there was absolutely no difference between anybody. They may be teaching that still.
    Another thing they taught was that nobody was ridiculous or bad or disgusting. Shortly before my father died, he said to me, 'You know-you never wrote a story with a villain in it.'
    I told him that was one of the things I learned in college after the war.

    While I was studying to be an anthropologist, I was also working as a police reporter for the famous Chicago City News Bureau for twenty-eight dollars a week. One time they switched me from the night shift to the day shift., so I worked sixteen hours straight. We were supported by all the newspapers in town, and the AP and the UP and all that. And we would cover the courts and the police stations and the Fire Department and the Coast Guard out on Lake Michigan and all that. We were connected to the institutions that supported us by means of pneumatic tubes which ran under the streets of Chicago.
    Reporters would telephone in stories to writers wearing headphones, and the writers would stencil the stories on mimeograph sheets. The stories were mimeographed and stuffed into the brass and velvet cartridges which the pneumatic tubes ate. The very toughest reporters and writers were women who had taken over the jobs of men who'd gone to war.
    And the first story I covered I had to dictate over the telephone to one of those beastly girls. It was about a young veteran who had taken a job running an old-fashioned elevator in an office building. The elevator door on the first floor was ornamental iron lace. Iron ivy snaked in and out of the holes. There was an iron twig with two iron lovebirds perched upon it.
    This veteran decided to take his car into the basement, and he closed the door and started down, but his wedding ring Was caught in all the ornaments. So he was hoisted into the air and the floor of the car went down, dropped out from under him, and the top of the car squashed him. So it goes.
    So I phoned this in, and the woman who was going to cut the stencil asked me. 'What did his wife say?'
    'She doesn't know yet,' I said. 'It just happened.'
    'Call her up and get a statement.'
    'What?'
    'Tell her you're Captain Finn of the Police Department. Say you have some sad news. Give her the news, and see what she says.'
    So I did. She said about what you would expect her to say. There was a baby. And so on.
    When I got back to the office, the woman writer asked me, just for her own information, what the squashed guy had looked Eke when he was squashed.
    I told her.
    'Did it bother you?' she said. She was eating a Three Musketeers Candy Bar.
    'Heck no, Nancy,' I said. 'I've seen lots worse than that in the war.'

  Even then I was supposedly writing a book about Dresden. It wasn't a famous air raid back then in America. Not many Americans knew how much worse it had been than Hiroshima, for instance. I didn't know that, either. There hadn't been much publicity.
    I happened to tell a University of Chicago professor at a cocktail party about the raid as I had seen it, about the book I would write.  He was a member of a thing called The Committee on Social Thought.  And he told me about the concentration camps, and about how the Germans had made soap and candles out of the fat of dead Jews and so on.
    All could say was, 'I know, I know. I know.'

     The Second World War had certainly made everybody very tough.  And I became a public relations man for General Electric in Schenectady, New York, and a volunteer fireman in the Village of Alplaus, where I bought my first home.  My boss there was one of the toughest guys I ever hope to meet.  He had been a lieutenant colonel in public relations in Baltimore.  While I was in Schenectady he joined the Dutch Reformed Church, which is a very tough church, indeed.
    He used to ask me sneeringly sometimes why I hadn't been an officer,, as though I'd done something wrong.
    My wife and I had lost our baby fat. Those were our scrawny years. We had a lot of scrawny veterans and their scrawny wives for friends. The nicest veterans in Schenectady,, I thought,, the kindest and funniest ones, the ones who hated war the most, were the ones who'd really fought.
    I wrote the Air Force back then, asking for details about the raid on Dresden, who ordered it, how many planes did it, why they did it, what desirable results there had been and so on. I was answered by a man who, like myself, was in public relations. He said that he was sorry, but that the information was top secret still.
    I read the letter out loud to my wife, and I said, 'Secret? My God-from whom?'

    We were United World Federalists back then. I don't know what we are now. Telephoners, I guess. We telephone a lot-or I do, anyway, late at night.

    A couple of weeks after I telephoned my old war buddy, Bernard V. O'Hare, I really did go to see him. That must have been in 1964 or so-whatever the last year was for the New York World's Fair. Eheu, fugaces labuntur anni. My name is Yon Yonson. There was a young man from Stamboul.
    I took two little girls with me, my daughter, Nanny, and her best friend, Allison Mitchell. They had never been off Cape Cod before. When we saw a river, we had to stop so they could stand by it and think about it for a while. They had never seen water in that long and narrow, unsalted form before. The river was the Hudson. There were carp in there and we saw them. They were as big as atomic submarines.
    We saw waterfalls, too, streams jumping off cliffs into the valley of the Delaware. There were lots of things to stop and see-and then it was time to go, always time to go. The little girls were wearing white party dresses and black party shoes, so strangers would know at once how nice they were. 'Time to go, girls,' I'd say. And we would go.
    And the sun went down, and we had supper in an Italian place, and then I knocked on the front door of the beautiful stone house of Bernard V. O'Hare. I was carrying a bottle of Irish whiskey like a dinner bell.
    I met his nice wife, Mary, to whom I dedicate this book. I dedicate it to Gerhard Mller, the Dresden taxi driver, too. Mary O'Hare is a trained nurse, which is a lovely thing for a woman to be.
    Mary admired the two little girls I'd brought, mixed them in with her own children, sent them all upstairs to play games and watch television.  It was only after the children were gone that I sensed that Mary didn't like me or didn't like something about the night.  She was polite but chilly.
    'It's a nice cozy house you have here,' I said, and it really was.
'I've fixed up a place where you can talk and not be bothered,' she said.
    'Good,' I said, and I imagined two leather chairs near a fire in a paneled room, where two old soldiers could drink and talk.  But she took us into the kitchen.  She had put two straight-backed chairs at a kitchen table with a white porcelain top.  That table top was screaming with reflected light from a two-hundred-watt bulb overhead.  Mary had prepared an operating room.  She put only one glass on it, which was for me.  She explained that O'Hare couldn't drink the hard stuff since the war.
    So we sat down.  O'Hare was embarrassed, but he wouldn't tell me what was wrong.  I couldn't imagine what it was about me that could bum up Mary so.  I was a family man.  I'd been married only once.  I wasn't a drunk.  I hadn't done her husband any dirt in the war.
    She fixed herself a Coca-Cola, made a lot of noise banging the ice-cube tray in the stainless steel sink.  Then she went into another part of the house.  But she wouldn't sit still.  She was moving all over the house, opening and shutting doors, even moving furniture around to work off anger.
    I asked O'Hare what I'd said or done to make her act that way.
    'It's all right,' he said.  "Don't worry about it.  It doesn't have anything to do with you.' That was kind of him.  He was lying.  It had everything to do with me.
    So we tried to ignore Mary and remember the war.  I took a couple of belts of the booze I'd brought.  We would chuckle or grin sometimes, as though war stories were coming back, but neither one of us could remember anything good.  O'Hare remembered one guy who got into a lot of wine in Dresden, before it was bombed, and we had to take him home in a wheelbarrow.
    It wasn't much to write a book about.  I remembered two Russian soldiers who had looted a clock factory.  They had a horse-drawn wagon full of clocks.  They were happy and drunk.  They were smoking huge cigarettes they had rolled in newspaper.
    That was about it for memories, and Mary was still making noise.  She finally came out in the kitchen again for another Coke.  She took another tray of ice cubes from the refrigerator, banged it in the sink, even though there was already plenty of ice out.
    Then she turned to me, let me see how angry she was, and that the anger was for me. She had been talking to herself, so what she said was a fragment of a much larger conversation. "You were just babies then!' she said.
    'What?" I said.
'You were just babies in the war-like the ones upstairs! '
    I nodded that this was true. We had been foolish virgins in the war, right at the end of childhood.
    'But you're not going to write it that way, are you.' This wasn't a question. It was an accusation.
    'I-I don't know,' I said.
    'Well, I know,' she said. 'You'll pretend you were men instead of babies, and you'll be played in the movies by Frank Sinatra and John Wayne or some of those other glamorous, war-loving, dirty old men. And war will look just wonderful, so we'll have a lot more of them. And they'll be fought by babies like the babies upstairs.'
    So then I understood. It was war that made her so angry. She didn't want her babies or anybody else's babies killed in wars. And she thought wars were partly encouraged by books and movies.

    So I held up my right hand and I made her a promise 'Mary,' I said, 'I don't think this book is ever going to be finished. I must have written five thousand pages by now, and thrown them all away. If I ever do finish it, though, I give you my word of honor: there won't be a part for Frank Sinatra or John Wayne.
    'I tell you what,' I said, 'I'll call it The Children's Crusade.'
    She was my friend after that.

    O'Hare and I gave up on remembering, went into the living room, talked about other things. We became curious about the real Children's Crusade, so O'Hare looked it up in a book he had, Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds, by Charles Mackay, LL.D. It was first published in London in 1841.
    Mackay had a low opinion of all Crusades.  The Children's Crusade struck him as only slightly more sordid than the ten Crusades for grown-ups.  O'Hare read this handsome passage out loud:
    History in her solemn page informs us that the Crusaders were but ignorant and savage men, that their motives were those of bigotry unmitigated, and that their pathway was one of blood and rears.  Romance, on the other hand, dilates upon their piety and heroism, and portrays, in her most glowing and impassioned hues, their virtue and magnanimity, the imperishable honor they acquired for themselves, and the great services they rendered to Christianity.
    And then O'Hare read this: Now what was the grand result of all these struggles?  Europe expended millions of her treasures, and the blood of two million of her people; and a handful of quarrelsome knights retained possession of Palestine for about one hundred years!
    Mackay told us that the Children's Crusade started in 1213, when two monks got the idea of raising armies of children in Germany and France, and selling them in North Africa as slaves. Thirty thousand children volunteered, thinking they were going to Palestine.  They were no doubt idle and deserted children who generally swarm in great cities, nurtured on vice and daring, said Mackay, and ready for anything.
    Pope Innocent the Third thought they were going to Palestine, too, and he was thrilled. 'These children are awake while we are asleep!' he said.
    Most of the children were shipped out of Marseilles, and about half of them drowned in shipwrecks.  The other half got to North Africa where they were sold.
    Through a misunderstanding, some children reported for duty at Genoa, where no slave ships were waiting.  They were fed and sheltered and questioned kindly by good people there-then given a little money and a lot of advice and sent back home.
    'Hooray for the good people of Genoa,' said Mary O'Hare.

    I slept that night in one of the children's bedrooms.  O'Hare had put a book for me on the bedside table.  It was Dresden, History, Stage and Gallery, by Mary Endell.  It was published in 1908, and its introduction began
    It is hoped that this little book will make itself useful.  It attempts to give to an English-reading public a bird's-eye view of how Dresden came to look as it does, architecturally; of how it expanded musically, through the genius of a few men, to its present bloom; and it calls attention to certain permanent landmarks in art that make its Gallery the resort of those seeking lasting impressions.
    I read some history further on
    Now, in 1760, Dresden underwent siege by the Prussians. On the fifteenth of July began the cannonade. The Picture-Gallery took fire. Many of the paintings had been transported to -the Konigstein, but some were seriously injured by splinters of bombshells-notably Francia's 'Baptism of Christ.' Furthermore, the stately Kreuzkirche tower, from which the enemy's movements had been watched day and night, stood in flames. It later succumbed. In sturdy contrast with the pitiful fate of the Kreuzkirche, stood the Frauenkirche, from the curves of whose stone dome the Prussian bombs -rebounded like rain. Friederich was obliged finally to give up the siege, because he learned of the fall of Glatz, the critical point of his new conquests. 'We must be off to Silesia, so that we do not lose everything.'
    The devastation of Dresden was boundless. When Goethe as a young student visited the city, he still found sad ruins 'Von der Kuppel der Frauenkirche sah ich these leidigen Trmmer zwischen die schone stddtische Ordnung hineingest; da rhmte mir der Kiister die Kunst des Baumeisters, welcher Kirche und Kuppel auf einen so unerinschten Fall schon eingeyichtet und bombenfest erbaut hatte. Der gute Sakristan deutete mir alsdann auf Ruinen nach allen Seiten und sagte bedenklich lakonisch: Das hat her Feind Gethan!'

    The two little girls and I crossed the Delaware River where George Washington had crossed it, the next morning. We went to the New York World's Fair, saw what the past had been like, according to the Ford Motor Car Company and Walt Disney, saw what the future would be like, according to General Motors.
    And I asked myself about the present: how wide it was, how deep it was, how much was mine to keep.

    I taught creative writing in the famous Writers Workshop at the University of Iowa for a couple of years after that. I got into some perfectly beautiful trouble, got out of it again. I taught in the afternoons. In the mornings I wrote. I was not be disturbed. I was working on my famous book about Dresden.
    And somewhere in there a nice man named Seymour Lawrence gave me a three-book contract, and I said, 'O.K., the first of the three will be my famous book about Dresden.'
    The friends of Seymour Lawrence call him 'Sam.' And I say to Sam now: 'Sam-here's the book.'

    It is so short and jumbled and jangled, Sam, because there is nothing intelligent to say about a massacre. Everybody is supposed to be dead, to never say anything or want anything ever again. Everything is supposed to be very quiet after a massacre, and it always is, except for the birds.
    And what do the birds say? All there is to say about a massacre, things like 'Poo-tee-weet?'

    I have told my sons that they are not under any circumstances to take part in massacres, and that the news of massacres of enemies is not to fill them with satisfaction or glee.

    I have also told them not to work for companies which make massacre machinery, and to express contempt for people who think we need machinery like that.

    As I've said I recently went back to Dresden with my friend O'Hare. We had a million laughs in Hamburg and West Berlin and East Berlin and Vienna and Salzburg and Helsinki, and in Leningrad, too. It was very good for me, because I saw a lot of authentic backgrounds for made-up stories which I will write later on. One of them will be Russian Baroque and another will be No Kissing and another will be Dollar Bar and another will be If the Accident Will, and so on.
    And so on.

    There was a Lufthansa plane that was supposed to fly from Philadelphia to Boston to Frankfurt. O'Hare was supposed to get on in Philadelphia and I was supposed to get on in Boston, and off we'd go. But Boston was socked in, so the plane flew straight to Frankfurt from Philadelphia. And I became a non-person in the Boston Fog, and Lufthansa put me in a limousine with some other non-persons and sent us to a motel for a non-night.
    The time would not pass. Somebody was playing with the clocks, and not only with the electric clocks, but the wind-up kind, too.  The second hand on my watch would twitch once, and a year would pass, and then it would twitch again.
    There was nothing I could do about it. As an Earthling., I had to believe whatever clocks said-and calendars.

    I had two books with me, which I'd meant to read on the plane. One was Words for the Wind, by Theodore Roethke, and this is what I found in there:
I wake to steep, and take my waking slow.
I feet my late in what I cannot fear.
I learn by going where I have to go.
    My other book was Erika Ostrovsky's Cline and His Vision.  Cline was a brave French soldier in the First World War-until his skull was cracked. After that he couldn't sleep, and there were noises in his head. He became a doctor, and he treated poor people in the daytime, and he wrote grotesque novels all night. No art is possible without a dance with death, he wrote.
     The truth is death, he wrote. I've fought nicely against it as long as I could ... danced with it, festooned it, waltzed it around ... decorated it with streamers, titillated it...
Time obsessed him. Miss Ostrovsky reminded me of the amazing scene in Death on the Installment Plan where Cline wants to stop the bustling of a street crowd. He screams on paper, Make them stop ... don't let them move anymore at all ... There, make them freeze ... once and for all! ... So that they won't disappear anymore!
    I looked through the Gideon Bible in my motel room for tales of great destruction. The sun was risen upon the Earth when Lot entered into Zo-ar, I read. Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord out of Heaven; and He overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon the ground.
    So it goes.
    Those were vile people in both those cities, as is well known. The world was better off without them.
    And Lot's wife, of course, was told not to look back where all those people and their homes had been. But she did look back, and I love her for that, because it was so human.
   She was turned to a pillar of salt.  So it goes.
    People aren't supposed to look back. I'm certainly not going to do it anymore.
    I've finished my war book now. The next one I write is going to be fun.
     This one is a failure, and had to be, since it was written by a pillar of salt. It begins like this:
    Listen:
    Billy Pilgrim has come unstuck in time.
    It ends like this:
    Poo-tee-weet?

Two

Listen:
    Billy Pilgrim has come unstuck in time.
    Billy has gone to sleep a senile widower and awakened on his wedding day.  He has walked through a door in 1955 and come out another one in 1941.  He has gone back through that door to find himself in 1963.  He has seen his birth and death many times, he says, and pays random visits to all the events in between.
    He says.
    Billy is spastic in time, has no control over where he is going next, and the trips aren't necessarily fun.  He is 'm a constant state of stage fright, he says, because he never knows what part of his life he is going to have to act in next.
    Billy was bon in 1922 in Ilium, New York, the only child of a barber there.  He was a funny-looking child who became a funny-looking youth-tall and weak, and shaped like a bottle of Coca-Cola.  He graduated from Ilium High School in the upper third of his class, and attended night sessions at the Ilium School of Optometry for one semester before being drafted for military service in the Second World War.  His father died in a hunting accident during the war.  So it goes.
    Billy saw service with the infantry in Europe, and was taken prisoner by the Germans.  After his honorable discharge from the Army in 1945, Billy again enrolled in the Ilium School of Optometry.  During his senior year there, he became engaged to the daughter of the founder and owner of the school, and then suffered a mild nervous collapse.

    He was treated in a veterans' hospital near Lake Placid, and was given shock treatments and released.  He married his fiance, finished his education, and was set up in business in Ilium by his father-in-law. Ilium is a particularly good city for optometrists because the General Forge and Foundry Company is there.  Every employee is required to own a pair of safety glasses, and to wear them in areas where manufacturing is going on. GF&F has sixty-eight thousand employees in Ilium. That calls for a lot of lenses and a lot of frames.
    Frames are where the money is.
    Bill became rich. He had two children, Barbara and Robert. In time, his daughter Barbara married another optometrist., and Billy set him up in business. Billy's son Robert had a lot of trouble in high school, but then he joined the famous Green Berets. He straightened out, became a fine Young man, and he fought in Vietnam.
    Early in 1968, a group of optometrists, with Billy among them, chartered an airplane to fly them from Ilium to an international convention of optometrists in Montreal. The plane crashed on top of Sugarbush Mountain, in Vermont.  Everybody was killed but Billy.  So it goes.
    While Billy was recuperating in a hospital in Vermont, his wife died accidentally of carbon-monoxide poisoning.  So it goes.
    When Billy finally got home to Ilium after the airplane crash, he was quiet for a while.  He had a terrible scar across the top Of his skull.  He didn't resume practice.  He had a housekeeper.  His daughter came over almost every day.
    And then, without any warning, Billy went to New York City, and got on an all-night radio program devoted to talk.  He told about having come unstuck in time.  He said, too, that he had been kidnapped by a flying saucer in 1967. The saucer was from the planet Tralfamadore, he said. He was taken to Tralfamadore, where he was displayed naked in a zoo, he said.  He was mated there with a former Earthling movie star named Montana Wildhack.

    Some night owls in Ilium heard Billy on the radio, and one of them called Billy's daughter Barbara. Barbara was upset. She and her husband went down to New York and brought Billy home. Billy insisted mildly that everything he had said on the radio was true. He said he had been kidnapped by the Tralfamadorians on the night of his daughter's wedding. He hadn't been missed, he said, because the Tralfamadorians had taken him through a time warp, so that he could be on Tralfamadore for years, and still be away from Earth for only a microsecond.
    Another month went by without incident, and then Billy wrote a letter to the Ilium News Leader, which the paper published. It described the creatures from Tralfamadore.
    The letter said that they were two feet high, and green., and shaped like plumber's friends. Their suction cups were on the ground, and their shafts, which were extremely flexible, usually pointed to the sky. At the top of each shaft was a little hand with a green eye in its palm. The creatures were friendly, and they could see in four dimensions. They pitied Earthlings for being able to see only three. They had many wonderful things to teach Earthlings, especially about time. Billy promised to tell what some of those wonderful things were in his next letter.

    Billy was working on his second letter when the first letter was published. The second letter started out like this:
    'The most important thing I learned on Tralfamadore was that when a person dies he only appears to die. He is still very much alive in the past, so it is very silly for people to cry at his funeral. All moments, past, present and future, always have existed, always will exist. The Tralfamadorians can look at all the different moments just that way we can look at a stretch of the Rocky Mountains, for instance. They can see how permanent all the moments are, and they can look at any moment that interests them. It is just an illusion we have here on Earth that one moment follows another one, like beads on a string, and that once a moment is gone it is gone forever.
    'When a Tralfamadorian sees a corpse, all he thinks is that the dead person is in a bad condition in that particular moment, but that the same person is just fine in plenty of other moments. Now, when I myself hear that somebody is dead, I simply shrug and say what the Tralfamadorians say about dead people, which is "so it goes."'
    And so on.

    Billy was working on this letter in the basement rumpus room of his empty house. It was his housekeeper's day off. There was an old typewriter in the rumpus room. It was a beast. It weighed as much as a storage battery. Billy couldn't carry it very far very easily, which was why he was writing in the rumpus room instead of somewhere else.
    The oil burner had quit. A mouse had eaten through the insulation of a wire leading to the thermostat. The temperature in the house was down to fifty degrees, but Billy hadn't noticed. He wasn't warmly dressed, either. He was barefoot, and still in his pajamas and a bathrobe, though it was late afternoon. His bare feet were blue and ivory.
The cockles of Billy's heart, at any rate, were glowing coals. What made them so hot was Billy's belief that he was going to comfort so many people with the truth about time. His door chimes upstairs had been ringing and ringing. It was his daughter Barbara up there wanting in. Now she let herself in with a key, crossed the floor over his head calling, 'Father? Daddy, where are you?' And so on.
    Billy didn't answer her, so she was nearly hysterical, expecting to find his corpse. And then she looked into the very last place there was to look-which was the rumpus room.

    'Why didn't you answer me when I called?' Barbara wanted to know, standing there in the door of the rumpus room. She had the afternoon paper with her, the one in which Billy described his friends from Tralfamadore.
    'I didn't hear you,' said Billy.
    The orchestration of the moment was this: Barbara was only twenty-one years old, but she thought her father was senile, even though he was only forty-six-senile because of damage to his brain in the airplane crash. She also thought that she was head of the family, since she had had to manage her mother's funeral, since she had to get a housekeeper for Billy, and all that. Also, Barbara and her husband were having to look after Billy's business interests, which were considerable, since Billy didn't seem to give a damn for business any more. All this responsibility at such an early age made her a bitchy flibbertigibbet. And Billy, meanwhile, was trying to hang onto his dignity, to persuade Barbara and everybody else that he was far from senile, that, on the contrary, he was devoting himself to a calling much higher than mere business.
    He was doing nothing less now, he thought, then prescribing corrective lenses for Earthling souls. So many of those souls were lost and wretched, Billy believed, because they could not see as well as Ws little green friends on Tralfamadore.

    'Don't lie to me, Father,' said Barbara. 'I know perfectly well you heard me when I called.' This was a fairly pretty girl, except that she had legs like an Edwardian grand piano. Now she raised hell with him about the letter in the paper. She said he was making a laughing stock of himself and everybody associated with him.
    'Father, Father, Father,' said Barbara, 'what are we going to do with you? Are you going to force us to put you where your mother is?' Billy's mother was still alive. She was in bed in an old people's home called Pine Knoll on the edge of Ilium.
    'What is it about my letter that makes you so mad?' Billy wanted to know.
    'It's all just crazy. None of it's true! '
    'It's all true. ' Bill's anger was not going to rise with hers. He never got mad at anything. He was wonderful that way.
    'There is no such planet as Tralfamadore.'
'It can't be detected from Earth, if that's what you mean,' said Billy. 'Earth can't be detected from Tralfamadore, as far as that goes. They're both very small. They're very far apart.'
    'Where did you get a crazy name like "Tralfamadore?"'
    'That's what the creatures who live there call it.
    'Oh God,' said Barbara, and she turned her back on him. She celebrated frustration by clapping her hands. 'May I ask you a simple question?'
    'Of course.'
    'Why is it you never mentioned any of this before the airplane crash?'
    'I didn't think the time was ripe.'

    And so on. Billy says that he first came unstuck in time in 1944, long before his trip to Tralfamadore. The Tralfamadorians didn't have anything to do with his coming unstuck They were simply able to give him insights into what was really going on.
    Billy first came unstuck while the Second World War was in progress. Billy was a chaplain's assistant in the war. A chaplain's assistant is customarily a figure of fun in the American Army. Billy was no exception. He was powerless to harm the enemy or to help his friends. In fact, he had no friends. He was a valet to a preacher, expected no promotions or medals, bore no arms, and had a meek faith in a loving Jesus which most soldiers found putrid.
    While on maneuvers in South Carolina, Billy played hymns he knew from childhood, played them on a little black organ which was waterproof. It had thirty-nine keys and two stops- vox humana and vox celeste. Billy also had charge of a portable altar, an olive-drab attach case with telescoping legs. It was lined with crimson plush, and nestled in that passionate plush were an anodized aluminum cross and a Bible.
    The altar and the organ were made by a vacuum-cleaner company in Camden, New Jersey-and said so.

    One time on maneuvers Billy was playing 'A Mighty Fortress Is Our God,' with music by Johann Sebastian Bach and words by Martin Luther. It was Sunday morning. Billy and his chaplain had gathered a congregatation of about fifty soldiers on a Carolina hillside. An umpire appeared. There were umpires everywhere, men who said who was winning or losing the theoretical battle, who was alive and who was dead.
    The umpire had comical news. The congregation had been theoretically spotted from the air by a theoretical enemy. They Were all theoretically dead now. The theoretical corpses laughed and ate a hearty noontime meal.
    Remembering this incident years later, Billy was struck by what a Tralfamadorian adventure with death that had been, to be dead and to eat at the same time.
    Toward the end of maneuvers., Billy was given an emergency furlough home because his father, a barber in Ilium, New York, was shot dead by a friend while they were out hunting deer. So it goes.

    When Billy got back from his furlough., there were orders for him to go overseas. He was needed in the headquarters company of an infantry regiment fighting in Luxembourg. The regimental chaplain's assistant had been killed in action. So it goes.

    When Billy joined the regiment, it was in the process of being destroyed by the Germans in the famous Battle of the Bulge. Billy never even got to meet the chaplain he was supposed to assist, was never even issued a steel helmet and combat boots. This was in December of 1944, during the last mighty German attack of the war.
    Billy survived, but he was a dazed wanderer far behind the new German lines. Three other wanderers, not quite so dazed, allowed Billy to tag along. Two of them were scouts, and one was an antitank gunner. They were without food or maps. Avoiding Germans they were delivering themselves into rural silences ever more profound. They ate snow.
    They went Indian file. First came the scouts, clever, graceful quiet. They had rifles. Next came the antitank gunner, clumsy and dense, warning Germans away with a Colt .45 automatic in one hand and a trench knife in the other.
    Last came Billy Pilgrim, empty-handed, bleakly ready for death. Billy was Preposterous-six feet and three inches tall, with a chest and shoulders like a box of kitchen matches. He had no helmet, no overcoat, no weapon and no boots. On his feet were cheap, low-cut civilian shoes which he had bought for his father's funeral. Billy had lost a heel, which made him bob up-and-down, up-and-down. The involuntary dancing up and down, up and down, made his hip joints sore.
    Billy was wearing a thin field jacket, a shirt and trousers of scratchy wool, and long underwear that was soaked with sweat. He was the only one of the four who had a beard. It was a random, bristly beard, and some of the bristles were white, even though Billy was only twenty-one years old. He was also going bald. Wind and cold and violent exercise had turned his face crimson.
    He didn't look like a soldier at all. He looked like a filthy flamingo.

    And on the third day of wandering, somebody shot at the four from far away-shot four times as they crossed a narrow brick road. One shot was for the scouts. The next one was for the antitank gunner, whose name was Roland Weary.
    The third bullet was for the filthy flamingo, who stopped dead center in the road when the lethal bee buzzed past his ear. Billy stood there politely, giving the marksman another chance. It was his addled understanding of the rules of warfare that the marksman should be given a second chance. The next shot missed Billy's kneecaps by inches, going end-on-end, from the sound of it.
    Roland Weary and the scouts were safe in a ditch, and Weary growled at Billy, 'Get out of the road, you dumb motherfucker.' The last word was still a novelty in the speech of white people in 1944. It was fresh and astonishing to Billy, who had never fucked anybody-and it did its job. It woke him up and got him off the road.

    'Saved your life again, you dumb bastard,' Weary said to Billy in the ditch. He had been saving Billy's fife for days, cursing him, kicking him, slapping him, making him move. It was absolutely necessary that cruelty be used, because Billy wouldn't do anything to save himself. Billy wanted to quit. He was cold, hungry, embarrassed, incompetent. He could scarcely distinguish between sleep and wakefulness now, on the third day, found no important differences either, between walking and standing still.
    He wished everybody would leave him alone. 'You guys go on without me,' he said again and again.
    Weary was as new to war as Billy. He was a replacement, too. As a part of a gun crew, he had helped to fire one shot in anger-from a 57-millimeter antitank gun. The gun made a ripping sound like the opening of a zipper on the fly of God Almighty. The gun lapped up snow and vegetation with a blowtorch feet long. The flame left a black arrow on the ground, showing the Germans exactly where the gun was hidden. The shot was a miss.
    What had been missed was a Tiger tank. It swiveled its 88-millimeter snout around sniffingly, saw the arrow on the ground. It fired. It killed everybody on the gun crew but Weary. So it goes.
    Roland Weary was only eighteen, was at the end of an unhappy childhood spent mostly in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. He had been unpopular in Pittsburgh. He had been unpopular because he was stupid and fat and mean, and smelled like bacon no matter how much he washed. He was always being ditched in Pittsburgh by people who did not want him with them.
    It made Weary sick to be ditched. When Weary was ditched, le would find somebody who was even more unpopular than himself, and he would horse around with that person for a while, pretending to be friendly. And then he would find some pretext for beating the shit out of him.
    It was a pattern. It was a crazy, sexy, murderous relationship Weary entered into with people he eventually beat up. He told hem about his father's collection of guns and swords and torture instruments and leg irons and so on. Weary's father, who was a plumber, actually did collect such things, and his collection was insured for four thousand dollars. He wasn't alone. He belonged to a big club composed of people who collected things like that.
    Weary's father once gave Weary's mother a Spanish thumbscrew in - working condition-for a kitchen paperweight. Another time he gave her a table lamp whose base was a model one foot high of the famous 'Iron Maiden of Nuremburg.' The real Iron Maiden was a medieval torture instrument, a sort of boiler which was shaped like a woman on the outside-and lined with spikes. The front of the woman was composed of two hinged doors. The idea was to put a criminal inside and then close the doors slowly. There were two special spikes where his eyes would be. There was a drain in the bottom to let out all the blood.
    So it goes.

    Weary had told Billy Pilgrim about the Iron Maiden, about the drain in the bottom-and what that was for. He had talked to Billy about dum-dums. He told him about his father's Derringer pistol, which could be carried in a vest pocket, which was yet capable of making a hole in a man 'which a bull bat could fly through without touching either wing.'
    Weary scornfully bet Billy one time that he didn't even know what a blood gutter was. Billy guessed that it was the drain in the bottom of the Iron Maiden, but that was wrong. A blood gutter, Billy learned, was the shallow groove in the side of the blade of a sword or bayonet.
    Weary told Billy about neat tortures he'd read about or seen in the movies or heard on the radio-about other neat tortures he himself had invented. One of the inventions was sticking a dentist's drill into a guy's ear. He asked Billy what he thought the worst form of execution was. Billy had no opinion. The correct answer turned out to be this: 'You stake a guy out on an anthill in the desert-see? He's face upward, and you put honey all over his balls and pecker, and you cut off his eyelids so he has to stare at the sun till he dies.' So it goes.

    Now, lying in the ditch with Billy and the scouts after having been shot at, Weary made Billy take a very close look at his trench knife. It wasn't government issue. It was a present from his father. It had a ten-inch blade that was triangular 'in 'cross section. Its grip consisted of brass knuckles, was a chain of rings through which Weary slipped his stubby fingers. The rings weren't simple. They bristled with spikes.
    Weary laid the spikes along Billy's cheek, roweled the cheek with savagely affectionate restraint. 'How'd you-like to be hit with this-hm? Hmmmmmmmmm?' he wanted to know.
    'I wouldn't,' said Billy.
    'Know why the blade's triangular?'
    'No.'
    'Makes a wound that won't close up.'
    'Oh.'
    'Makes a three-sided hole in a guy. You stick an ordinary knife in a guy-makes a slit. Right? A slit closes right up. Right?
    'Right.'
    'Shit. What do you know? What the hell they teach you in college?'
    'I wasn't there very long.' said Billy, which was true. He had had only six months of college and the college hadn't been a regular college, either. It had been the night school of the Ilium School of Optometry.
    "Joe College,' said Weary scathingly.
    Billy shrugged.
    'There's more to life than what you read in books.' said Weary. 'You'll find that out.'
    Billy made no reply to this, either, there in the ditch, since he didn't want the conversation to go on any longer than necessary. He was dimly tempted to say, though, that he knew a thing or two about gore. Billy, after all, had contemplated torture and hideous wounds at the beginning and the end of nearly every day of his childhood. Billy had an extremely gruesome crucifix hanging on the wall of his little bedroom in Ilium. A military surgeon would have admired the clinical fidelity of the artist's rendition of all Christ's wounds-the spear wound, the thorn wounds, the holes that were made by the iron spikes. Billy's Christ died horribly. He was pitiful.
    So it goes.

    Billy wasn't a Catholic, even though he grew up with a ghastly crucifix on the wall. His father had no religion. His mother was a substitute organist for several churches around town. She took Billy with her whenever she played, taught him to play a little, too. She said she was going to join a church as soon as she decided which one was right.
    She never did decide. She did develop a terrific hankering for a crucifix, though. And she bought one from a Sante F gift shop during a trip the little family made out West during the Great Depression. Like so many Americans, she was trying to construct a life that made sense from things she found in gift shops.
    And the crucifix went up on the wall of Billy Pilgrim.
    The two scouts, loving the walnut stocks of their rifles in the ditch, whispered that it was time to move out again. Ten minutes had gone by without anybody's coming to see if they were hit or not, to finish them off. Whoever had shot was evidently far away and all alone.
    And the four crawled out of the ditch without drawing any more fire. They crawled into a forest like the big, unlucky mammals they were. Then they stood up and began to walk quickly. The forest was dark and cold. The pines were planted in ranks and files. There was no undergrowth. Four inches of unmarked snow blanketed the ground. The Americans had no choice but to leave trails in the show as unambiguous as diagrams in a book on ballroom dancing-step, slide, rest-step, slide,-rest.

   'Close it up and keep it closed!' Roland Weary warned Billy Pilgrim as they moved out. Weary looked like Tweedledum or Tweedledee, all bundled up for battle. He was short and thick.
    He had every piece of equipment he had ever been issued, every present he'd received from home: helmet, helmet liner, wool cap, scarf, gloves, cotton undershirt, woolen undershirt, wool shirt, sweater, blouse, jacket, overcoat, cotton underpants, woolen underpants, woolen trousers, cotton socks, woolen socks, combat boots, gas mask, canteen, mess kit, first-aid kit, trench knife, blanket, shelter-half , raincoat, bulletproof Bible, a pamphlet entitled 'Know Your Enemy,' another pamphlet entitled 'Why We Fight' and another pamphlet of German phrases rendered in English phonetics,, which would enable Weary to ask Germans questions such as 'Where is your headquarters?' and 'How many howitzers have you?' Or to tell them, 'Surrender. Your situation is hopeless,' and so on.
    Weary had a block of balsa wood which was supposed to be a foxhole pillow. He had a prophylactic kit containing two tough condoms 'For the Prevention of Disease Only!' He had a whistle he wasn't going to show anybody until he got promoted to corporal. He had a dirty picture of a woman attempting sexual intercourse with a Shetland pony. He had made Billy Pilgrim admire that picture several times.

    The woman and the pony were posed before velvet draperies which were fringed with deedlee-balls. They were flanked by Doric columns. In front of one column was a potted palm. The Picture that Weary had was a print of the first dirty photograph in history. The word photography was first used in 1839, and it was in that year, too, that Louis J. M. Daguerre revealed to the French Academy that an image formed on a silvered metal plate covered with a thin film of silver iodide could be developed in the presence of mercury vapor.
   In 1841, only two years later, an assistant to Daguerre, Andr Le Fvre, was arrested in the Tuileries Gardens for attempting to sell a gentleman a picture of the woman and the pony. That was where Weary bought his picture,, too-in the Tuileries. Le Fvre argued that the picture was fine art, and that his intention was to make Greek mythology come alive. He said that columns and the potted palm proved that.
    When asked which myth he meant to represent, Le Fvre, replied that there were thousands of myths like that, with the woman a mortal and the pony a god.
    He was sentenced to six months in prison. He died there of pneumonia. So it goes.

    Billy and the Scouts were skinny people. Roland Weary had fat to burn. He was a roaring furnace under all his layers of wool and straps and canvas. He had so much energy that he bustled back and forth between Billy and the scouts, delivering dumb messages which nobody had sent and which nobody was pleased to receive. He also began to suspect, since he was so much busier than anybody else, that he was the leader.
    He was so hot and bundled up, in fact, that he had no sense of danger. His vision of the outside world was limited to what he could see through a narrow slit between the rim of his helmet and his scarf from home, which concealed his baby face from the bridge of his nose on down. He was so snug in there that he was able to pretend that he was safe at home, having survived the war, and that he was telling his parents and his sister a true war story-whereas the true war story was still going on.
    Weary's version of the true war story went like this: There was a big German attack, and Weary and his antitank buddies fought like hell until everybody was killed but Weary. So it goes. And then Weary tied in with two scouts, and they became close friends immediately, and they decided to fight them way back to their own lines. They were going to travel fast. They were damned if they'd surrender. They shook hands all around. They called themselves 'The Three Musketeers.'
    But then this damn college kid, who was so weak he shouldn't even have been in the army, asked if he could come along. He didn't even have a gun or a knife. He didn't even have a helmet or a cap. He couldn't even walk right-kept bobbing up-and down, up-and-down, driving everybody crazy, giving their position away. He was pitiful. The Three Musketeers pushed and carried and dragged the college kid all the way back to their own lines, Weary's story went. They saved his God-damned hide for him.
    In. real life, Weary was retracing his steps, trying to find out what had happened to Billy. He had told the scouts to wait while he went back for the college bastard. He passed under a low branch now. It hit the top of his helmet with a clonk. Weary didn't hear it. Somewhere a big dog was barking. Weary didn't hear that, either. His war story was at a very exciting point. An officer was congratulating the Three Musketeers, telling them that he was going to put them in for Bronze Stars.
    'Anything else I can do for you boys?' said the officer.
    'Yes, sir,' said one of the scouts. 'We'd like to stick together for the rest of the war, sir. Is there some way you can fix it so nobody will ever break up the Three Musketeers?'

    Billy Pilgrim had stopped in the forest. He was leaning against a tree with his eyes closed. His head was tilted back and his nostrils were flaring. He was like a poet in the Parthenon.
    This was when Billy first came unstuck in time. His attention began to swing grandly through the full arc of his life, passing into death, which was violet light. There wasn't anybody else there, or any thing. There was just violet light and a hum.
And then Billy swung into life again, going backwards until he was in pre-birth, which was red light and bubbling sounds. And then he swung into life again and stopped. He was a little boy taking a shower with his hairy father at the Ilium Y.M.C.A. He smelled chlorine from the swimming pool next door, heard the springboard boom.
    Little Billy was terrified, because his father had said Billy was going to learn to swim by the method of sink-or-swim. Ms father was going to throw Billy into the deep end, and Billy was going to damn well swim.
    It was like an execution. Billy was numb as his father carried him from the shower room to the pool. His eyes were closed. When he opened his eyes, he was on the bottom of the pool, and there was beautiful music everywhere. He lost consciousness, but the music went on. He dimly sensed that somebody was rescuing him. Billy resented that.
    From there he traveled in time to 1965. He was forty-one years old, and he was visiting his decrepit mother at Pine Knoll, an old people's home he had put her in only a month before. She had caught pneumonia, and wasn't expected to live. She did live, though, for years after that.
    Her voice was nearly gone, so, in order to hear her, Billy had to put his ear right next to her papery lips. She evidently had something very important to say.
    'How ...?' she began, and she stopped. She was too tired. She hoped that she wouldnt have to say the rest of the sentence, and that Billy would finish it for her
    But Billy had no idea what was on her mind. 'How what, Mother?' he prompted.
    She swallowed hard, shed some tears. Then she gathered energy from all over her ruined body, even from her toes and fingertips. At last she bad accumulated enough to whisper this complete sentence:
    'How did I get so old? '

    Billy's antique mother passed out, and Billy was led from the room by a pretty nurse. The body of an old man covered by a sheet was wheeled by just as Billy entered the corridor. The man had been a famous marathon runner in his day. So it goes. This was before Billy had his head broken in an airplane crash, by the way-before he became so vocal about flying saucers and traveling in time.
   Billy sat down in a waiting room. He wasn't a widower yet. He sensed something hard under the cushion of his overstuffed chair. He dug it out, discovered that it was a book, The Execution of Private Slovik, by William Bradford Huie. It was a true account of the death before an American fixing squad of private Eddie D. Slovik, 36896415, the only American soldier to be shot for cowardice since the Civil War. So it goes.
    Billy read the opinion of a staff judge advocate who reviewed Slovik's case, which ended like this: He has directly challenged the authority of the government, and future discipline depends upon a resolute reply to this challenge. If the death penalty is ever to be imposed for desertion, it should be imposed in this case, not as a punitive measure nor as retribution, but to maintain that discipline upon which alone an army can succeed against the enemy. There was no recommendation for clemency in the case and none is here recommended. So it goes.

    Billy blinked in 1965, traveled in time to 1958. He was at a banquet in honour of a Little League team of which his son Robert was a member. The coach, who had never been married, was speaking. He was all choked up. 'Honest to God,' he was Saying, 'I'd consider it an honor just to be water boy for these kids.'

   Billy blinked in 1958, traveled in time to 1961. It was New Year's Eve, and Billy was disgracefully drunk at a party where everybody was in optometry or married to an optometrist.
    Billy usually didn't drink much, because the war had ruined his stomach, but he certainly had a snootful now, and he was being unfaithful to his wife Valencia for the first and only time. He had somehow persuaded a woman to come into the laundry room of the house, and then sit up on the gas dryer, which was running.
    The woman was very drunk herself, and she helped Billy get her girdle off. 'What was it you wanted to talk about?' she said.
    'It's all night,' said Billy. He honestly thought it was all right. He couldn't remember the name of the woman.
   'How come they call you Billy instead of William?'
    'Business reasons,' said Billy. That was true. His father-in-law, who owned the Ilium School of Optometry, who had set Billy up in practice, was a genius in his field. He told Billy to encourage people to call him Billy-because it would stick in their memories. It would also make him seem slightly magical, since there weren't any other grown Billys around. It also compelled people to think of him as a friend right away.

    Somewhere in there was an awful scene, with people expressing disgust for Billy and the woman, and Billy found himself out in his automobile, trying to find the steering wheel.
    The main thing now was to find the steering wheel. At first, Billy windmilled his arms, hoping to find it by luck. When that didn't work, he became methodical, working in such a way that the wheel could not possibly escape him. He placed himself hard against the left-hand door, searched every square inch of the area before him. When he failed to find the wheel, he moved over six inches, and searched again. Amazingly, he was eventually hard against the right-hand door, without having found the wheel. He concluded that somebody had stolen it. This angered him as he passed out.
    He was in the back seat of his car., which was why he couldn't find the steering wheel.

    Now somebody was shaking Billy awake. Billy stiff felt drunk, was still angered by the stolen steering wheel. He was back in the Second World War again, behind the German lines. The person who was shaking him was Roland Weary. Weary had gathered the front of Billy's field jacket into his hands. He banged Billy against a tree, then puffed him away from it, flung him in the direction he was supposed to take under his own power.
    Billy stopped, shook his head. 'You go on,' he said.
    'What? '
    'You guys go on without me. I'm all right.'
    'You're what?'
    'I'm O.K.'
    'Jesus-I'd hate to see somebody sick,' said Weary, through five layers of humid scarf from home. Lilly had never seen Weary's face. He had tried to imagine it one time, had imagined a toad in a fishbowl.
    Weary kicked and shoved Billy for a quarter of a mile. The scouts were waiting between the banks of a frozen creek. They had heard the dog. They had heard men calling back and forth, too-calling like hunters who had a pretty good idea of where their quarry was.
    The banks of the creek were high enough to allow the scouts, to stand without being seen. Billy staggered down the bank ridiculously. After him came Weary, clanking and clinking and tinkling and hot.
    'Here he is, boys,' said Weary. 'He don't want to live, but he's gonna live anyway. When he gets out of this, by God, he's gonna owe his life to the Three Musketeers. '
    Billy Pilgrim, there in the creekbed, thought he, Billy Pilgrim, was turning to steam painlessly. If everybody would leave him alone for just a little while, he thought, he wouldn't cause anybody any more trouble. He would turn to steam and float up among the treetops.
    Somewhere the big dog barked again. With the help of fear and echoes and winter silences, that dog had a voice like a big bronze gong.

    Roland Weary, eighteen years old, insinuated himself between the scouts, draped a heavy arm around the shoulder of each. 'So what do the Three Musketeers do now?' he said.
    Billy Pilgrim was having a delightful hallucination. He was wearing dry, warm, white sweatsocks, and he was skating on a ballroom floor. Thousands cheered. This wasn't time-travel. it had never happened, never would happen. It was the craziness of a dying young man with his shoes full of snow.
    One scout hung his head, let spit fall from his lips. The other did the same. They studied the infinitesimal effects of spit on snow and history. They were small, graceful people. They had been behind German lines before many times- living like woods creatures, living from moment to moment in useful terror, thinking brainlessly with their spinal cords.
    Now they twisted out from under Weary's loving arms. They told Weary that he and Billy had better find somebody to surrender to. The Scouts weren't going to wait for them any more.
    And they ditched Weary and Billy in the creekbed.

    Billy Pilgrim went on skating, doing tricks in sweat-socks, tricks that most people would consider impossible-making turns, stopping on a dime and so on. The cheering went on, but its tone was altered as the hallucination gave way to time-travel.
    Billy stopped skating, found himself at a lectern in a Chinese restaurant in Ilium, New York, on an early afternoon in the autumn of 1957. He was receiving a standing ovation from the Lions Club. He had just been elected President, and it was necessary that he speak. He was scared stiff, thought a ghastly mistake had been made. AR those prosperous, solid men out there would discover now that they had elected a ludicrous waif. They would hear his reedy voice, the one he'd had in the war. He swallowed, knew that all he -had for a voice box was a little whistle cut from a willow switch. Worse-he had nothing to say. The crowd quieted down. Everybody was pink and beaming.
    Billy opened his mouth, and out came a deep, resonant tone. His voice was a gorgeous instrument. It told jokes which brought down the house. It grew serious, told jokes again, and ended on a note of humility. The explanation of the miracle was this: Billy had taken a course in public speaking.
    And then he was back in the bed of the frozen creek again. Roland Weary was about to beat the living shit out of him.

    Weary was filled with a tragic wrath. He had been ditched again. He stuffed his pistol into its holster. He slipped his knife into its scabbard. Its triangular blade and blood gutters on all three faces. And then he shook Billy hard, rattled his skeleton, slammed him against a bank.
    Weary barked and whimpered through his layers of scarf from home. He spoke unintelligibly of the sacrifices he had made on Billy's behalf. He dilated upon the piety and heroism of 'The Three Musketeers,' portrayed, in the most glowing and impassioned hues, their virtue and magnanimity, the imperishable honor they acquired for themselves, and the great services they rendered to Christianity,
   It was entirely Billy's fault that this fighting organization no longer existed, Weary felt, and Billy was going to pay. Weary socked Billy a good one on the side of the jaw, knocked Billy away from the bank and onto the snow-covered ice of the creek. Billy was down on all fours on the ice, and Weary kicked him in the ribs, rolled him over on his side. Billy tried to form himself into a ball.
    'You shouldn't even be in the Army,' said Weary.
    Billy was involuntarily making convulsive sounds that were a lot like laughter. 'You think it's funny, huh?' Weary inquired. He walked around to Billy's back. Billy's jacket and shirt and undershirt had been hauled up around his shoulders by the violence, so his back was naked. There, inches from the tips of Weary's combat boots, were the pitiful buttons of Billy's spine.
    Weary drew back his right boot, aimed a kick at the spine, at the tube which had so many of Billy's important wires in it. Weary was going to break that tube.
    But then Weary saw that he had an audience. Five German soldiers and a police dog on a leash were looking down into the bed of the creek. The soldiers' blue eyes were filled with bleary civilian curiosity as to why one American would try to murder another one so far from home, and why the victim should laugh.

Three

The Germans and the dog were engaged in a military operation which had an amusingly self-explanatory name, a human enterprise which is seldom described in detail, whose name alone, when reported as news or history, gives many war enthusiasts a sort of post-coital satisfaction. It is, in the imagination of combat's fans, the divinely listless loveplay that follows the orgasm of victory. It is called 'mopping up.'
    The dog, who had sounded so ferocious in the winter distances, was a female German shepherd. She was shivering. Her tail was between her legs. She had been borrowed that morning from a farmer. She had never been to war before. She had no idea what game was being played. Her mine was Princess.
    Two of the Germans were boys in their early teens. Two were ramshackle old me droolers as toothless as carp. They were irregulars, armed and clothed fragmentarily with junk taken from real soldiers who were newly dead. So it goes. They were farmers from just across the German border, not far away.
    Their commanander was a middle-aged corporal-red-eyed., scrawny, tough as dried beef, sick of war. He had been wounded four times-and patched up, and sent back to war. He was a very good soldier-about to quit, about to find somebody to surrender to. His bandy legs were thrust into golden cavalry boots which he had taken from a dead Hungarian colonel on the Russian front. So it goes.
    Those boots were almost all he owned in this world. They were his home. An anecdote: One time a recruit was watching him bone and wax those golden boots, and he held one up to the recruit and said, 'If you look in there deeply enough, you'll see Adam and Eve.'
    Billy Pilgrim had not heard this anecdote. But, lying on the black ice there, Billy stared into the patina of the corporal's boots, saw Adam and Eve in the golden depths. They were naked. They were so innocent, so vulnerable, so eager to behave decently. Billy Pilgrim loved them.

    Next to the golden boots were a pair of feet which were swaddled in rags. They were crisscrossed by canvas straps, were shod with hinged wooden clogs. Billy looked up at the face that went with the clogs.  It was the face of a blond angel of fifteen-year-old boy.
    The boy was as beautiful as Eve.

    Billy was helped to his feet by the lovely boy, by the heavenly androgyne. And the others came forward to dust the snow off Billy., and then they searched him for weapons. He didn't have any. The most dangerous thing they found on his person was a two-inch pencil stub.
    Three inoffensive bangs came from far away. They came from German rifles. The two scouts who had ditched Billy and Weary had just been shot. They had been lying in ambush for Germans. They had been discovered and shot from behind. Now they were dying in the snow, feeling nothing, turning the snow to the color of raspberry sherbet. So it goes. So Roland Weary was the last of the Three Musketeers.
    And Weary, bug-eyed with terror, was being disarmed. The corporal gave Weary's pistol to the pretty boy. He marveled at Weary's cruel trench knife, said in German that Weary would no doubt like to use the knife on him, to tear his face off with the spiked knuckles, to stick the blade into his belly or throat. He spoke no English, and Billy and Weary understood no German.
    'Nice playthings you have, the corporal told Weary, and he handed the knife to an old man. 'Isn't that a pretty thing? Hmmm?
    He tore open Weary's overcoat and blouse. Brass buttons flew like popcorn. The corporal reached into Weary's gaping bosom as though he meant to tear out his pounding heart, but he brought out Weary's bulletproof Bible instead.
    A bullet-proof Bible is a Bible small enough to be slipped into a soldier's breast pocket, over his heart. It is sheathed in steel.

    The corporal found the dirty picture of the woman and the pony in Weary's hip pocket. 'What a lucky pony, eh?' he said. "Hmmmm? Hmmmm? Don't you wish you were that pony?' He handed the picture to the other old man. 'Spoils of war! It's all yours, you lucky lad.'
    Then he made Weary sit down in the snow and take off his combat boots, which he gave to the beautiful boy. He gave Weary, the boy's clogs. So Weary and Billy were both without decent military footwear now' and they had to walk for miles and miles, with Weary's clogs clacking, with Billy bobbing up-and-down, up-and-down, crashing into Weary from time to time.
    'Excuse me,' Billy would say, or 'I beg your pardon.'
    They were brought at last to a stone cottage at a fork in the road. It was a collecting point for prisoners of war. Billy and Weary were taken inside, where it was warm and smoky. There vas a fire sizzling and popping in the fireplace. The fuel was furniture. There were about twenty other Americans in there, sitting on the floor with their backs to the wall, staring into the flames-thinking whatever there was to think, which was zero.
Nobody talked.  Nobody had any good war stories to tell.
    Billy and Weary found places for themselves, and Billy went to sleep with his head on the shoulder of an unprotesting captain. The captain was a chaplain. He was a rabbi. He had been shot through the hand.

    Billy traveled in time, opened his eyes, found himself staring into the glass eyes of a jade green mechanical owl. The owl was hanging upside down from a rod of stainless steel. The owl was Billy's optometer in his office in Ilium. An optometer is an instrument for measuring refractive errors in eyes-in order that corrective lenses may be prescribed.
    Billy had fallen asleep while examining a female patient who was m a chair on the other side of the owl. He had fallen asleep at work before. It had been funny at first. Now Billy was starting to get worried about it, about his mind in general. He tried to remember how old he was, couldn't. He tried to remember what year it was. He couldn't remember that, either.
    'Doctor,' said the patient tentatively.
    'Hm?' he said.
    'You're so quiet.'
    'Sorry.'
    'You were talking away there-and then you got so quiet'
    'Um.'
    'You see something terrible?' 'Terrible?'
    'Some disease in my eyes?'
    'No, no,' said Billy, wanting to doze again. 'Your eyes are fine. You just need glasses for reading.' He told her to go across the corridor-to see the wide selection of frames there.

    When she was gone, Billy opened the drapes and was no wiser as to what was outside. The view was still blocked by a venetian blind., which he hoisted clatteringly.  Bright sunlight came crashing in.  There were thousands of parked automobiles out there, twinkling on a vast lake of blacktop.  Billy's office was part of a suburban shopping center.
    Right outside the window was Billy's own Cadillac El Dorado Coupe de Ville. He read the stickers on the bumper. 'Visit Ausable Chasm,' said one. 'Support Your Police Department,' said another. There was a third. 'Impeach Earl Warren it said. The stickers about the police and Earl Warren were gifts from Billy's father-in-law, a member of the John Birch Society. The date on the license plate was 1967, which would make Billy Pilgrim forty-four years old. He asked himself this: 'Where have all the years gone?'

    Billy turned his attention to his desk. There was an open copy of The Review of Optometry there. It was opened to an editorial, which Billy now read, his lips moving slightly.
What happens in 1968 will rule the fare of European optometrists for at least 50 years! Billy read. With this warning, Jean Thiriart, Secretary of the National Union of Belgium Opticians, is pressing for formation of a 'European Optometry Society.' The alternatives, he says, will be the obtaining of Professional status, or, by 1971, reduction to the role of spectacle-sellers.
    Billy Pilgrim tried hard to care.
    A siren went off, scared the hell out of him. He was expecting the Third World War at any time. The siren was simply announcing high noon. It was housed in a cupola atop a firehouse across the street from Billy's office.
    Billy closed his eyes. When he opened them, he was back in the Second World War again. His head was on the wounded rabbi's shoulder. A German was kicking his feet, telling him to wake up, that it was time to move on.

    The Americans, with Billy among them, formed a fools' parade on the road outside.
    There was a photographer present, a German war correspondent with a Leica. He took pictures of Billy's and Roland Weary's feet. The picture was widely published two days later as heartening evidence of how miserably equipped the American Army often was, despite its reputation for being rich.
    The photographer wanted something more lively, though, a picture of an actual capture. So the guards staged one for him. They threw Billy into shrubbery.  When Billy came out of the shrubbery, his face wreathed in goofy good will, they menaced him with their machine pistols, as though they were capturing him then.

    Billy's smile as he came out of the shrubbery was at least as peculiar as Mona Lisa's, for he was simultaneously on foot in Germany in 1944 and riding his Cadillac in 1967. Germany dropped away, and 1967 became bright and clear, free of interference from any other time. Billy was on his way to a Lions Club luncheon meeting. It was a hot August, but Billy's car was air-conditioned. He was stopped by a signal in the middle of Ilium's black ghetto. The people who lived here hated it so much that they had burned down a lot of it a month before. It was all they had, and they'd wrecked it. The neighborhood reminded Billy of some of the towns he had seen in the war. The curbs and sidewalks were crushed in many places, showing where the National Guard tanks and half-tracks had been.

    'Blood brother,' said a message written in pink paint on the side of a shattered grocery store.
    There was a tap on Billy's car window. A black man was out there. He wanted to talk about something. The light had changed. Billy did the simplest thing. He drove on.

    Billy drove through a scene of even greater desolation. It looked like Dresden after it was fire-bombed-like the surface of the moon. The house where Billy had grown up used to be somewhere in what was so empty now. This was urban renewal. A new Ilium Government Center and a Pavilion of the Arts and a Peace Lagoon and high-rise apartment buildings were going up here soon.
    That was all right with Billy Pilgrim.

    The speaker at the Lions Club meeting was a major in the Marines. He said that Americans had no choice but to keep fighting in Vietnam until they achieved victory or until the Communists realized that they could not force their way of life -on weak countries. The major had been there on two separate tours of duty. He told of many terrible and many wonderful things he had seen. He was in favor of increased bombings, of bombing North Vietnam back into the Stone Age, if it refused to see reason.

    Billy was not moved to protest the bombing of North Vietnam-, did not shudder about the hideous things he himself had seen bombing do.  He was simply having lunch with the Lions Club, of which he was past president now.

    Billy had a framed prayer on his office wall which expressed his method for keeping going, even though he was unenthusiastic about living. A lot of patients who saw the prayer on Billy's wall told him that it helped them to keep going,, too. It went like this

GOD GRANT ME
THE SERENITY TO ACCEPT
THE THINGS I CANNOT CHANGE
COURAGE
TO CHANGE THE THINGS I CAN,
AND WISDOM ALWAYS
TO TELL THE
DIFFERENCE.

    Among the things Billy Pilgrim could not change were the past, the present and the future.

    Now he was being introduced to the Marine major. The person who was performing the introduction was telling the major that Billy was a veteran., and that Billy had a son who was a sergeant in the Green Berets-in Vietnam.
    The major told Billy that the Green Berets were doing a great job, and that he should be proud of his son.
    'I am. I certainly am,' said Billy Pilgrim.

    He went home for a nap after lunch. He was under doctor's orders to take a nap every day. The doctor hoped that this would relieve a complaint that Billy had: Every so often, for no apparent reason, Billy Pilgrim would find himself weeping. Nobody had ever caught Billy doing it. Only the doctor knew. It was an extremely quiet thing Billy did, and not very moist.

    Billy owned a lovely Georgian home in Ilium. He was rich as Croesus, something he had never expected to be, not in a million years. He had five other optometrists working for him in the shopping plaza location, and netted over sixty thousand dollars a year. In addition, he owned a fifth of the new Holiday Inn out on Route 54, and -half of three Tastee-Freeze stands. Tastee-Freeze was a sort of frozen custard. It gave all the pleasure that ice cream could give, without the stiffness and bitter coldness of ice cream.

    Billy's home was empty. His daughter Barbara was about to get warned, and she and his wife had gone downtown to pick out patterns for her crystal and silverware. There was a note saying so on the kitchen table. There were no servants. People just weren't interested in careers in domestic service anymore. There wasn't a dog, either.
    There used to be a dog named Spot, but he died. So it goes. Billy had liked Spot a lot, and Spot had liked him.

    Billy went up the carpeted stairway and into his and his wife's bedroom. The room had flowered wallpaper. There was a double bed with a clock-radio on a table beside it. Also on the table were controls for the electric blanket, and a switch to turn on a gentle vibrator which was bolted to the springs of the box mattress. The trade name of the vibrator was 'Magic Fingers.' The vibrator was the doctor's idea, too.
Billy took off his tri-focals and his coat and his necktie and his shoes, and he closed the venetian blinds and then the drapes, and he lay down on the outside of the coverlet. But sleep would not come. Tears came instead. They seeped. Billy turned on the Magic Fingers, and he was jiggled as he wept.

    The doorchimes rang. Billy got off the bed and looked down through a window at the front doorstep, to see if somebody important had come to call. There was a crippled man down there, as spastic in space as Billy Pilgrim was in time. Convulsions made the man dance flappingly all the time, made him change his expressions, too, as though he were trying to imitate various famous movie stars.
    Another cripple was ringing a doorbell across the street. He was an crutches. He had only one leg. He was so jammed between his crutches that his shoulders hid his ears.
    Billy knew what the cripples were up to: They were selling subscriptions to magazines that would never come. People subscribed to them because the salesmen were so pitiful. Billy had heard about this racket from a speaker at the Lions Club two weeks before--a man from the Better Business Bureau. The man said that anybody who saw cripples working a neighbourhood for magazine subscriptions should call the police.
    Billy looked down the street, saw a new, Buick Riviera parked about half a block away. There was a man in it, and Billy assumed correctly that he was the man who had hired the cripples to do this thing.  Billy went on weeping as he contemplated the cripples and their boss.  His doorchimes clanged hellishly.
    He closed his eyes, and opened them again. lie was still weeping, but he was back in Luxembourg again. He was marching with a lot of other prisoners. It was a winter wind that was bringing tears to his eyes.

    Ever since Billy had been thrown into shrubbery for the sake of the picture, he had been seeing Saint Elmo's fire, a sort of electronic radiance around the heads of his companions and captors. It was in the treetops and on the rooftops of Luxembourg, too. It was beautiful.
    Billy was marching with his hands on top of his head, and so were all the other Americans. Billy was bobbing up-and-down, up-and-down. Now he crashed into Roland Weary accidentally. 'I beg your pardon,' he said.
    Weary's eyes were tearful also. Weary was crying because of horrible pains in his feet. The hinged clogs were transforming his feet into blood puddings.
    At each road intersection Billy's group was joined by more Americans with their hands on top of their haloed heads. Billy had smiled for them all. They were moving like water, downhill all the time, and they flowed at last to a main highway on a valley's floor. Through the valley flowed a Mississippi of humiliated Americans. Tens of thousands of Americans shuffled eastward, their hands clasped on top of their heads. They sighed and groaned.
    Billy and his group joined the river of humiliation, and the late afternoon sun came out from the clouds. The Americans didn't have the road to themselves. The west-bound lane boiled and boomed with vehicles which were rushing German reserves to the front. The reserves were violent, windburned, bristly men. They had teeth like piano keys.
    They were festooned with machine-gun belts, smoked cigars, and guzzled booze. They took wolfish bites from sausages, patted their horny palms with potato-masher grenades.
    One soldier in black was having a drunk herd's picnic all by himself on top of a tank.  He spit on the Americans.  The spit hit Roland Weary's shoulder, gave Weary a fourragire of snot and blutwurst and tobacco juice, and Schnapps.
    Billy found the afternoon stingingly exciting. There was so much to see-dragon's teeth, killing machine, corpses with bare feet that were blue and ivory.  So it goes.
    Bobbing up-and-down, up-and-down, Billy beamed lovingly at a bright lavender farmhouse that had been spattered with machine-gun bullets. Standing in its cock-eyed doorway was a German colonel. With him was his unpainted whore.
    Billy crashed into Weary's shoulder, and Weary cried out sobbingly. 'Walk right! Walk right!'
    They were climbing a gentle rise now. When they reached the top, they weren't in Luxembourg any more. They were in Germany.

    A motion-picture camera was set up at the border-to record the fabulous victory. Two civilians in bearskin coats were leaning on the camera when Billy and Weary came by. They had run out of film hours ago.
    One of them singled out Billy's face for a moment, then focused at infinity again. There was a tiny plume of smoke at infinity. There was a battle there. People were dying there. So it goes.
    And the sun went down, and Billy found himself bobbing in place in a railroad yard. There were rows and rows of boxcars waiting. They had brought reserves to the front. Now they were going to take prisoners into Germany's interior.
    Flashlight beams danced crazily.

    The Germans sorted out the prisoners according to rank. They put sergeants with sergeants, majors with majors, and so on. A squad of full colonels was halted near Billy. One of them had double pneumonia. He had a high fever and vertigo. As the railroad yard dipped and swooped around the colonel, he tried to hold himself steady by staring into Billy's eyes.
    The colonel coughed and coughed, and then he said to Billy, 'You one of my boys?' This was a man who had lost an entire regiment, about forty-five hundred men-a lot of them children, actually. Billy didn't reply. The question made no sense.
    'What was your outfit?' said the colonel. He coughed and coughed. Every time he inhaled his lungs rattled like greasy paper bags.
    Billy couldn't remember the outfit he was from.
    'You from the Four-fifty-first?'
    'Four-fifty-first what?' said Billy.
    There was a silence. 'Infantry regiment,' said the colonel at last.
    'Oh,' said Billy Pilgrim.

    There was another long silence, with the colonel dying and dying, drowning where he stood. And then he cited out wetly, 'It's me, boys! It's Wild Bob!' That is what he had always wanted his troops to call him: 'Wild Bob.'
    None of the people who could hear him were actually from his regiment, except for Roland Weary, and Weary wasn't listening. All Weary could think of was the agony in his own feet.
    But the colonel imagined that he was addressing his beloved troops for the last time, and he told them that they had nothing to be ashamed of, that there were dead Germans all over the battlefield who wished to God that they had never heard of the Four-fifty-first. He said that after the war he was going to have a regimental reunion in his home town, which was Cody, Wyoming. He was going to barbecue whole steers.
    He said all this while staring into Billy's eyes. He made the inside of poor Bill's skull echo with balderdash. 'God be with you, boys!' he said, and that echoed and echoed. And then he said. 'If you're ever in Cody, Wyoming, just ask for Wild Bob!' I was there. So was my old war buddy, Bernard V. O'Hare.

    Billy Pilgrim was packed into a boxcar with many other privates. He and Roland Weary were separated. Weary was packed into another car in the same train.
    There were narrow ventilators at the comers of the car, under the eaves. Billy stood by one of these, and, as the crowd pressed against him, he climbed part way up a diagonal comer brace to make more room. 'Ms placed his eyes on a level with the ventilator, so he could see another train about ten yards away.
    Germans were writing on the cars with blue chalk-the number of persons in each car, their rank, their nationality, the date on which they had been put aboard. Other Germans were securing the hasps on the car doors with wire and spikes and other trackside trash. Billy could hear somebody writing on his car, too, but he couldn't see who was doing it.
    Most of the privates on Billy's car were very young-at the end of childhood. But crammed into the comer with Billy was a former hobo who was forty years old.
    'I been hungrier than this,' the hobo told Billy. 'I been m worse places than this. This ain't so bad.'

    A man in a boxcar across the way called out through the ventilator that a man. had just died in there. So it goes. There were four guards who heard him. They weren't excited by the news.
    'Yo, yo,' said one, nodding dreamily. 'Yo, yo.'
    And the guards didn't open the car with the dead man in it. They opened the next car instead, and Billy Pilgrim was enchanted by what was in there. It was like heaven. There was candlelight, and there were bunks with quilts and blankets heaped on them. There was a cannonball stove with a steaming coffeepot on top. There was a table with a bottle of wine and a loaf of bread and a sausage on it. There were four bowls of soup.
    There were pictures of castles and lakes and pretty girls on the walls. This was the rolling home of the railroad guards, men whose business it was to be forever guarding freight rolling from here to there. The four guards went inside and closed the door.

    A little while later they came out smoking cigars, talking contentedly in the mellow lower register of the German language. One of them saw Billy's face at the ventilator. He wagged a finger at him in affectionate warning, telling him to be a good boy.
    The Americans across the way told the guards again about the dead man on their car. The guards got a stretcher out of their own cozy car, opened the dead man's car and went inside. The dead man's car wasn't crowded at all. There were just six live colonels in there-and one dead one.
    The Germans carried the corpse out. The corpse was Wild Bob. So it goes.

    During the night, some of the locomotives began to tootle to one another, and then to move. The locomotive and the last car of each train were marked with a striped banner of orange and black, indicating that the train was not fair game for airplanes that it was carrying prisoners of war.

    The war was nearly over. The locomotives began to move east in late December. The war would end in May. German prisons everywhere were absolutely full, and there was no longer any food for the prisoners to eat, and no longer any fuel to keep them warm.  And yet-here came more prisoners.

    Billy Pilgrim's train, the longest train of all, did not move for two days.
    'This ain't bad,' the hobo told Billy on the second day. 'This ain't nothing at all.'
    Billy looked out through the ventilator. The railroad yard was a desert now, except for a hospital train marked with red crosses-on a siding far, far away. Its locomotive whistled. The locomotive of Billy Pilgrim's train whistled back. They were saying, 'Hello.'

    Even though Billy's train wasn't moving., its boxcars were kept locked tight. Nobody was to get off until the final destination. To the guards who walked up and down outside, each car became a single organism which ate and drank and excreted through its ventilators. It talked or sometimes yelled through its ventilators, too. In went water and loaves of blackbread and sausage and cheese, and out came shit and piss and language.
    Human beings in there were excreting into steel helmets, which were passed to the people at the ventilators, who dumped them. Billy was a dumper. The human beings also passed canteens, which guards would fill with water. When food came in, the human beings were quiet and trusting and beautiful. They shared.

    Human beings in there took turns standing or lying down. The legs of those who stood were like fence posts driven into a warm., squirming, fatting, sighing earth. The queer earth was a mosaic of sleepers who nestled like spoons.
    Now the train began to creep eastward.
    Somewhere in there was Christmas. Billy Pilgrim nestled like a spoon with the hobo on Christmas night, and he fell asleep, and he traveled in time to 1967 again-to the night he was kidnapped by a flying saucer from Tralfamadore.

Four

    Billy Pilgrim could not sleep on his daughters wedding night. He was forty-four. The wedding had taken place that afternoon in a gaily striped tent in Billy's backyard. The stripes were orange and black.
    Billy and his wife, Valencia, nestled like spoons in their big double bed. They were jiggled by Magic Fingers. Valencia didn't need to be jiggled to sleep. Valencia was snoring like a bandsaw. The poor woman didn't have ovaries or a uterus any more.
    They had been removed by a surgeon-by one of Billy's partners in the New Holiday Inn.
    There was a full moon.
    Billy got out of bed in the moonlight. He felt spooky and luminous felt as though he were wrapped in cool fur that was full of static electricity. He looked down at his bare feet. They were ivory and blue.

    Billy now shuffled down his upstairs hallway, knowing he was about to be kidnapped by a flying saucer. The hallway was zebra-striped with darkness and moonlight. The moonlight came into the hallway through doorways of the empty rooms of Billy's two children, children no more. They were gone forever. Billy was guided by dread and the lack of dread. Dread told him when to stop. Lack of it told him when to move again. He stopped.
    He went into his daughter's room. Her drawers were dumped. her closet was empty. Heaped in the middle of the room were all the possessions she could not take on a honeymoon. She had a Princess telephone extension all her own-on her windowsill Its tiny night light stared at Billy. And then it rang.
    Billy answered. There was a drunk on the other end. Billy could almost smell his breath-mustard gas and roses. It was a wrong number. Billy hung up. There was a soft drink bottle on the windowsill. Its label boasted that it contained no nourishment whatsoever.

    Billy Pilgrim padded downstairs on his blue and ivory feet. He went into the kitchen, where the moonlight called his attention to a half bottle of champagne on the kitchen table, all that was left from the reception in the tent. Somebody had stoppered it again. Drink me,' it seemed to say.
    So Billy uncorked it with his thumbs. It didn't make a pop. The champagne was dead. So it goes.
    Billy looked at the clock on the gas stove. He had an hour to kill before the saucer came. He went into the living room, swinging the bottle like a dinner bell, turned on the television. He came slightly unstuck in time, saw the late movie backwards, then forwards again. It was a movie about American bombers in the Second World War and the gallant men who flew them. Seen backwards by Billy, the story went like this:
    American planes, full of holes and wounded men and corpses took off backwards from an airfield in England. Over France a few German fighter planes flew at them backwards, sucked bullets and shell fragments from some of the planes and crewmen. They did the same for wrecked American bombers on the ground, and those planes flew up backwards to join the formation.
    The formation flew backwards over a German city that was in flames. The bombers opened their bomb bay doors, exerted a miraculous magnetism which shrunk the fires, gathered them into cylindrical steel containers, and lifted the containers into the bellies of the planes. The containers were stored neatly in racks. The Germans below had miraculous devices of their own, which were long steel tubes. They used them to suck more fragments from the crewmen and planes. But there were still a few wounded Americans, though, and some of the bombers were in bad repair. Over France, though, German fighters came up again, made everything and everybody as good as new.

    When the bombers got back to their base, the steel cylinders were taken from the racks and shipped back to the United States of America, where factories were operating night and day, dismantling the cylinders, separating the dangerous contents into minerals. Touchingly, it was mainly women who did this work. The minerals were then shipped to specialists in remote areas. It was their business to put them into the ground., to hide them cleverly, so they would never hurt anybody ever again.
    The American fliers turned in their uniforms, became high school kids. And Hitler turned into a baby, Billy Pilgrim supposed. That wasn't in the movie. Billy was extrapolating. Everybody turned into a baby, and all humanity, without exception, conspired biologically to produce two perfect people named Adam and Eve, he supposed.
    Billy saw the war movies backwards then forwards-and then it was time to go out into his backyard to meet the flying saucer. Out he went, his blue and ivory feet crushing the wet salad of the lawn. He stopped, took a swig, of the dead champagne. It was like 7-Up. He would not raise his eyes to the sky, though he knew there was a flying saucer from Tralfamadore up there. He would see it soon enough, inside and out, and he would see, too, where it came from soon enough-soon enough.
    Overhead he heard the cry of what might have been a melodious owl, but it wasn't a melodious owl. It was a flying saucer from Tralfamadore, navigating in both space and time, therefore seeming to Billy Pilgrim to have come from nowhere all at once. Somewhere a big dog barked.

    The saucer was one hundred feet in diameter, with portholes around its rim. The light from the portholes was a pulsing purple. The only noise it made was the owl song. It ca-me down to hover over Billy, and to enclose him in a cylinder of pulsing in purple light. Now there was the sound of a seeming kiss as an airtight hatch in the bottom of the saucer was opened. Down snaked a ladder that was outlined in pretty lights like a Ferris
wheel.
    Billy's will was paralyzed by a zap gun aimed at him from one of the portholes. It became imperative that he take hold of the bottom rung of the sinuous ladder, which he did. The rung was electrified, so that Billy's hands locked onto it hard. He was hauled into the airlock, and machinery closed the bottom door. Only then did the ladder, wound onto a reel in the airlock, let him go. Only then did Billy's brain start working again.

    There were two peepholes inside the airlock-with yellow eyes pressed to them. There was a speaker on the wall. The Tralfamadorians had no voice boxes. They communicated telepathicary. They were able to talk to Billy by means of a computer and a sort of electric organ which made every Earthling speech sound.
    'Welcome aboard, Mr. Pilgrim,' said the loudspeaker. 'Any questions?'
    Billy licked his lips, thought a while, inquired at last: 'Why me? '
    That is a very Earthling question to ask, Mr. Pilgrim. Why you?  Why us for that matter?  Why anything?  Because this moment simply is.  Have you ever seen bugs trapped in amber?'
    'Yes.' Billy in fact, had a paperweight in his office which was a blob of polished amber with three ladybugs embedded in it.
    'Well, here we are, Mr. Pilgrim, trapped in the amber of this moment. There is no why.'

    They introduced an anesthetic into Billy's atmosphere now, put him to sleep. They carded him to a cabin where he was strapped to a yellow Barca-Lounger which they had stolen from a Sears & Roebuck warehouse. The hold of the saucer was crammed with other stolen merchandise, which would be used to furnish Billy's artificial habitat in a zoo on Tralfamadore.
    The terrific acceleration of the saucer as it left Earth twisted Billy's slumbering body, distorted his face, dislodged him m time, sent him back to the war.
    When he regained consciousness, he wasn't on the flying saucer.  He was in a boxcar crossing Germany again.
    Some people were rising from the floor of the car, and others were lying down. Billy planned to He down, too. It would be lovely to sleep. It was black in the car, and black outside the car, which seemed to be about two miles an hour.  The car never seemed to go any faster than that. It was a long time between clicks, between joints in the track. There would be a click, and then a year would go by, and then there would be another click
    The train often stopped to let really important trains bawl and hurtle by. Another thing it did was stop on sidings near prisons, leaving a few cars there. It was creeping across all of Germany, growing shorter all the time.

    And Billy let himself down oh so gradually now, hanging onto the diagonal cross-brace in the comer in order to make himself seem nearly weightless to those he was joining on the floor. He knew it was important that he made himself nearly ghostlike when lying down. He had forgotten why, but a reminder soon came.
    'Pilgrim,' said a person he was about to nestle with, 'is that you?'
    Billy didn't say anything, but nestled very politely, closed his eyes.
    'God damn it' said the person. 'That is you, isn't it?' He sat up and explored Billy rudely with his hands.  'It's you, all right. Get the hell out of here.'
    Now Billy sat up, too-wretched, close to tears.
    'Get out of here! I want to sleep!'
    'Shut up,' said somebody else.
    'I'll shut up when Pilgrim gets away from here.'
    So Billy stood up again, clung to the cross-brace.  'Where can I sleep?' he asked quietly.
    'Not with me.'
    'Not with me, you son of a bitch,' said somebody else. 'You yell. You kick.'
    'I do?'
    "You're God damn right you do. And whimper.'
    'I do?'
    'Keep the hell away from here., Pilgrim.'
    And now there was an acrimonious madrigal, with parts sung in all quarters of the car. Nearly everybody seemingly, had an atrocity story of something Billy Pilgrim had done to him in his sleep. Everybody told Billy Pilgrim to keep the hell away.

    So Billy Pilgrim had to sleep standing up, or not sleep at all. And food had stopped coming in through the ventilators, and the days and nights were colder all the time.

    On the eighth day, the forty-year-old hobo said to Billy, 'This ain't bad. I can be comfortable anywhere.'
    'You can?' said Billy.
    On the ninth day, the hobo died. So it goes. His last words were, 'You think this is bad? This ain't bad.'
    There was something about death and the ninth day. There was a death on the ninth day in the car ahead of Billy's too. Roland Weary died-of gangrene that had started in his mangled feet. So it goes.
    Weary, in his nearly continuous delirium, told again and again of the Three Musketeers, acknowledged that he was dying, gave many messages to be delivered to his family in Pittsburgh. Above all, he wanted to be avenged, so he said again and again the name of the person who had killed him. Everyone on the car learned the lesson well.
    'Who killed me?" he would ask.
    And everybody knew the answer., which was this: "Billy Pilgrim.'

    Listen- on the tenth night the peg was pulled out of the hasp on Billy's boxcar door, and the door was opened.  Billy Pilgrim was lying at an angle on the corner-brace, self-crucified, holding himself there with a blue and ivory claw hooked over the- sill of the ventilator.  Billy coughed -when the door was opened, and when he coughed he shit thin gruel.  This was in accordance with the Third Law of Motion according to Sir Isaac Newton.  This law tells us that for every action there is a reaction which is equal and opposite in direction.
    This can be useful in rocketry.

    The train had arrived on a siding by a prison which was originally constructed as an extermination camp for Russian prisoners of war.
    The guards peeked inside Billy's car owlishly, cooed calmingly. They had never dealt with Americans before, but they surely understood this general sort of freight. They knew that it was essentially a liquid which could be induced to flow slowly toward cooing and light. It was nighttime.

    The only light outside came from a single bulb which hung from a pole-high and far away. All was quiet outside, except for the guards, who cooed like doves. And the liquid began to flow. Gobs of it built up in the doorway, plopped to the ground.

    Billy was the next-to-last human being to reach the door. The hobo was the last. The hobo could not flow, could not plop. He wasn't liquid any more. He was stone. So it goes.

    Billy didn't. want to drop from the car to the ground. He sincerely believed that he would shatter like glass. So the guards helped him down, cooing still. They set him down facing the train. It was such a dinky train now.
    There was a locomotive, a tender, and three little boxcars. The last boxcar was the railroad guards' heaven on wheels. Again-in that heaven on wheels-the table was set. Dinner was served.

    At the base of the pole from which the light bulb hung were three seeming haystacks. The Americans were wheedled and teased over to those three stacks, which weren't hay after all. They were overcoats taken from prisoners who were dead. So it goes.

    It was the guards' firmly expressed wish that every American without an overcoat should take one.  The coats were cemented together with ice, so the guards used their bayonets as ice picks, pricking free collars and hems and sleeves and so on, then peeling off coats and handing them out at random. The coats were stiff and dome-shaped, having conformed to their piles.
    The coat that Billy Pilgrim got had been crumpled and frozen in such a way, and was so small, that it appeared to be not a coat but a sort of large black, three-cornered hat. There were gummy stains on it, too, like crankcase drainings or old strawberry jam. There seemed to be a dead, furry animal frozen to it. The animal was in fact the coat's fur collar.
    Billy glanced dully at the coats of his neighbors. Their coats all had brass buttons or tinsel or piping or numbers or stripes or eagles or moons or stars dangling from them. They were soldiers' coats. Billy was the only one who had a coat from a dead civilian. So it goes.
    And Billy and the rest were encouraged to shuffle around their dinky train and into the prison camp. There wasn't anything warm or lively to attract them-merely long, low, narrow sheds by the thousands, with no lights inside.
    Somewhere a dog barked. With the help of fear and echoes and winter silences, that dog had a voice like a big bronze gong.

    Billy and the rest were wooed through gate after gate, and Billy saw his first Russian. The man was all alone in the night-a ragbag with a round, flat face that glowed like a radium dial.
    Billy passed within a yard of him. There was barbed wire between them. The Russian did not wave or speak, but he looked directly into Billy's soul with sweet hopefulness, as though Billy might have good news for him-news he might be too stupid to understand, but good news all the same.

    Billy blacked out as he walked through gate after gate. He came to what he thought might be a building on Tralfamadore. It was shrilly lit and lined with white tiles. It was on Earth, though. It was a delousing station through which all new prisoners had to pass.
    Billy did as he was told, took off his clothes. That was the first thing they told him to do on Tralfamadore, too.
    A German measured Billy's upper right arm with his thumb and forefinger, asked a companion what sort of an army would send a weakling like that to the front. They looked at the other American bodies now, pointed out a lot more that were nearly as bad as Billy's.

    One of the best bodies belonged to the oldest American by far, a high school teacher from Indianapolis. His name was Edgar Derby. He hadn't been in Billy's boxcar. He'd been in Roland Weary's car, had cradled Weary's head while he died. So it goes. Derby was forty-four years old. He was so old he had a son who was a marine in the Pacific theater of war.
    Derby had pulled political wires to get into the army at his age. The subject he had taught in Indianapolis was Contemporary Problems in Western Civilization. He also coached the tennis team, and took very good care of his body.
    Derby's son would survive the war. Derby wouldn't. That good body of his would be filled with holes by a firing squad in Dresden in sixty-eight days. So it goes.

    The worst American body wasn't Billy's. The worst body belonged to a car thief from Cicero, Illinois. Ms name was Paul Lazzaro. He was tiny, and not only were his bones and teeth rotten, but his skin was disgusting. Lazzaro was polka-dotted all over with dime-sized scars. He had had many plagues of boils.
    Lazzaro, too, had been on Roland Weary's boxcar, and had given his word of honor to Weary that he would find some way to make Billy Pilgrim pay for Weary's death. He was looking around now, wondering which naked human being was Billy.
    The naked Americans took their places under many showerheads along a white-tiled wall. There were no faucets they could control. They could only wait for whatever was coming. Their penises were shriveled and their balls were retracted. Reproduction was not the main business of the evening.

    An unseen hand turned a master valve. Out of the showerheads gushed scalding rain. The rain was a blow-torch that did not warm. It jazzed and jangled Billy's skin without thawing the ice in the marrow of his long bones.
    The Americans' clothes were meanwhile passing through poison gas. Body lice and bacteria and fleas were dying by the billions. So it goes.
    And Billy zoomed back in time to his infancy. He was a baby who had just been bathed by his mother. Now his mother wrapped him in a towel, carried him into a rosy room that was filled with sunshine.  She unwrapped him, laid him on the tickling towel, powdered him between his legs, joked with him, patted his little jelly belly.  Her palm on his little jelly belly made potching sounds.
    Billy gurgled and cooed.

    And then Billy was a middle-aged optometrist again, playing hacker's golf this time- on a blazing summer Sunday morning. Billy never went to church any more. He was hacking with three other optometrists. Billy was on the green in seven strokes, and it was his turn to putt.
    It was an eight-foot putt and he made it. He bent over to take the ball out of the cup, and the sun went behind a cloud. Billy was momentarily dizzy. When he recovered, he wasn't on the golf course any more. He was strapped to a yellow contour chair in a white chamber aboard a flying saucer, which was bound for Tralfamadore.

    'Where am I?' said Billy Pilgrim.
    'Trapped in another blob of amber, Mr. Pilgrim. We are where we have to be just now-three hundred million miles from Earth, bound for a time warp which will get us to Tralfamadore in hours rather than centuries.'
    'How-how did I get here?'
    'It would take another Earthling to explain it to you. Earthlings are the great explainers, explaining why this event is structured as it is, telling how other events may be achieved or avoided. I am a Tralfamadorian, seeing all time as you might see a stretch of Rocky Mountains. All time is all time. It does not change. It does not lend itself to warnings or explanations. It simply is. Take it moment by moment, and you will find that we are all, as I've said before, bugs in amber.'
    'You sound to me as though you don't believe in free will,' said Billy Pilgrim.

    'If I hadn't spent so much time studying Earthlings,' said the Tralfamadorian, 'I wouldn't have any idea what was meant by "free will." I've visited thirty-one inhabited plants in the universe, and I have studied reports on one hundred more. Only on Earth is there any talk of free will.'

Five

    Billy Pilgrim says that the Universe does not look like a lot of bright little dots to the creatures from Tralfamadore. The creatures can see where each star has been and where it is going, so that the heavens are filled with rarefied, luminous spaghetti. And Tralfamadorians don't see human beings as two-legged creatures, either. They see them as great millipedes with babies' legs at one end and old people's legs at the other,' says Billy Pilgrim.

    Billy asked for something to read on the trip to Tralfamadore. His captors had five million Earthling books on microfilm, but no way to project them in Billy's cabin. They had only one actual book in English, which would be placed in a Tralfamadorian museum. It was Valley of the Dolls, by Jacqueline Susann.
    Billy read it, thought it was pretty good in spots. The people in it certainly had their ups-and-downs, ups-and-downs. But Billy didn't want to read about the same ups-and-downs over and over again. He asked if there wasn't, please, some other reading matters around.
    'Only Tralfamadorian novels, which I'm afraid you couldn't begin to understand,' said the speaker on the wall.
    'Let me look at one anyway.'
    So they sent him in several. They were little things. A dozen of them might have had the bulk of Valley of the Dolls-with all its ups-and-downs, up-and-downs.

    Billy couldn't read Tralfamadorian, of course, but he could at least see how the books were laid out-in brief clumps of symbols separated by stars. Billy commented that the clumps might be telegrams.
    'Exactly,' said the voice.
    'They are telegrams?'
    'There are no telegrams on Tralfamadore. But you're right: each clump of-symbols is a brief, urgent message describing a situation, a scene., We Tralfamadorians read them all at once, not one after the other. There isn't any particular relationship between all the messages, except that the author has chosen them carefully, so that, when seen all at once, they produce an image of life that is beautiful and surprising and deep.  There is no beginning, no middle, no end, no suspense, no moral, no causes, no effects.  What we love in our books are the depths of many marvelous moments seen all at one time.'

    Moments after that, the saucer entered a time warp, and Billy was flung back into his childhood. He was twelve years old, quaking as he stood with his mother and father on Bright Angel Point, at the rim of Grand Canyon. The little human family was staring at the floor of the canyon, one mile straight down.
    'Well,' said Billy's father, manfully kicking a pebble into space, 'there it is.' They had come to this famous place by automobile. They had had several blowouts on the way.
    'It was worth the trip,' said Billy's mother raptly. 'Oh, God was it ever worth it.'
    Billy hated the canyon. He was sure that he was going to fall in. His mother touched him, and he wet his pants.

    There were other tourists looking down into the canyon, too, and a ranger was there to answer questions. A Frenchman who had come all the way from France asked the ranger in broken English ff many people committed suicide by jumping in.
    'Yes, sir,' said the ranger. 'About three folks a year.' So it goes.

    And Billy took a very short trip through time,, made a peewee jump of only ten days, so he was still twelve, still touring the West with his family. Now they were down in Carlsbad Caverns, and Billy was praying to God to get him out of there before the ceiling fell in.
    A ranger was explaining that the Caverns had been discovered by a cowboy who saw a huge cloud of bats come out of a hole in the ground. And then he said that he was going to mm out all the lights., and that it would probably be the first time in the lives of most people there that they had ever been in darkness that was total.
    Out went the lights. Billy didn't even know whether he was still alive or not. And then something ghostly floated in air to his left. It had numbers on it. His father had taken out his Pocket watch. The watch had a radium dial.

    Billy went from total dark to total light, found himself back in the war, back in the delousing station again. The shower was over. An unseen hand had turned the water off.
    When Billy got his clothes back, they weren't any cleaner, but all the little animals that had been living in them were dead. So it goes. And his new overcoat was thawed out and limp now. It was much too small for Billy. It had a fur collar and a g of crimson silk, and had apparently been made for an impresario about as big as an organ-grinder's monkey. It was full of bullet holes.
    Billy Pilgrim dressed himself. He put on the little overcoat, too. It split up the back, and, at the shoulders, the sleeves came entirely free. So the coat became a fur-collared vest. It was meant to flare at its owners waist, but the flaring took place at Billy's armpits. 'Me Germans found him to be one of the most screamingly funny things they had seen in all of the Second World War. They laughed and laughed.

    And the Germans told everybody else to form in ranks of five, with Billy as their pivot. Then out of doors went the parade, and through gate after gate again. 'Mere were more starving Russians with faces like radium dials. The Americans were livelier than before. The jazzing with hot water had cheered them up. And they came to a shed where a corporal with only one arm and one eye wrote the name and serial number of each prisoner in a big, red ledger. Everybody was legally alive now. Before they got their names and numbers in that book, they were missing in action and probably dead.
    So it goes.

    As the Americans were waiting to move on, an altercation broke out in their rear-most rank. An American had muttered something which a guard did not like. The guard knew English, and he hauled the American out of ranks knocked him down.
    The American was astonished. He stood up shakily, spitting blood. He'd had two teeth knocked out. He had meant no harm by what he'd said, evidently, had no idea that the guard would hear and understand.
    'Why me?' he asked the guard.
    The guard shoved him back into ranks. 'Vy you? Vy anybody?' he said.

    When Billy Pilgrim's name was inscribed in the ledger of the prison camp, he was given a number., too, and an iron dogtag in which that number was stamped. A slave laborer from Poland had done the stamping.  He was dead now.  So it goes.
    Billy was told to hang the tag' around his neck along with his American dogtags, which he did. The tag was like a salt cracker, perforated down its middle so that a strong man could snap it in two with his bare hands. In case Billy died, which he didn't, half the tag would mark his body and half would mark his grave.
    After poor Edgar Derby, the high school teacher, was shot in Dresden later on, a doctor pronounced him dead and snapped his dogtag in two. So it goes.

    Properly enrolled and tagged, the Americans were led through gate after gate again. In two days' time now their families would learn from the International Red Cross that they were alive.
    Next to Billy was little Paul Lazzaro, who had promised to avenge Roland Weary. Lazzaro wasn't thinking about vengeance. He was thinking about his terrible bellyache. His stomach had shrunk to the size of a walnut. That dry, shriveled pouch was as sore as a boil.
    Next to Lazzaro was poor, doomed old Edgar Derby, with his American and German dogs displayed like a necklace, on the outside of his clothes. He had expected to become a captain, a company commander, because of his wisdom and age. Now here he was on the Czechoslovakian border at midnight.
    'Halt,' said a guard.
    The Americans halted. They stood there quietly in the cold. The sheds they were among were outwardly like thousands of other sheds they had passed. There was this difference, though: the sheds had tin chimneys, and out of the chimneys whirled constellations of sparks.
    A guard knocked on a door.
    The door was flung open from inside. Light leaped out through the door, escaped from prison at 186,000 miles per second. Out marched fifty middle-aged Englishmen. They were singing "Hail, Hail, the Gang's All Here' from the Pirates of Penzance'.

    These lusty, ruddy vocalists were among the first English-speaking prisoners to be taken in the Second World War. Now they were singing to nearly the last. They had not seen a woman or a child for four years or more. They hadn't seen any birds, either. Not even sparrows would come into the camp.
    The Englishmen were officers. Each of them had attempted to escape from another prison at least once.  Now they were here, dead-center in a sea of dying Russians.
    They could tunnel all they pleased. They would inevitably surface within a rectangle of barbed wire, would find themselves greeted listlessly by dying Russians who spoke no English, who had no food or useful information or escape plans of their own. They could scheme all they pleased to hide aboard a vehicle or steal one, but no vehicle ever came into their compound. They could feign illness, if they liked, but that wouldn't earn them a trip anywhere, either. The only hospital in the camp was a six-bed affair in the British compound itself.

    The Englishmen were clean and enthusiastic and decent and strong. They sang boomingly well. They had been singing together every night for years.
    The Englishmen had also been lifting weights and chinning themselves for years. Their bellies were like washboards. The muscles of their calves and upper arms were like cannonballs. They were all masters of checkers and chess and bridge and cribbage and dominoes and anagrams and charades and Ping-Pong and billiards, as well.
    They were among the wealthiest people in Europe, in terms of food. A clerical error early in the war, when food was still getting through to prisoners, had caused the Red Cross to ship them five hundred parcels every month instead of fifty. The Englishmen had hoarded these so cunningly that now, as the war was ending, they had three tons of sugar, one ton of coffee, eleven hundred pounds of chocolate, seven hundred pounds of tobacco, seventeen hundred pounds of tea, two tons of flour, one ton of canned beef, twelve hundred pounds of canned butter, sixteen hundred pounds of canned cheese, eight hundred pounds of powdered milk., and two tons of orange marmalade.
    They kept all this in a room without windows. They had ratproofed it by lining it with flattened tin cans.

    They were adored by the Germans, who thought they were exactly what the Englishmen ought to be. They made war look stylish and reasonable, and fun. So the Germans let them have four sheds, though one shed would have held them all. And, in exchange for coffee or chocolate or tobacco, the Germans gave them paint and lumber and nails and cloth for fixing things up.
    The Englishmen had known for twelve hours that American guests were on their way.  They had never had guests before, and they went to work like darling elves, sweeping, mopping, cooking, baking-making mattresses of straw and burlap bags, setting tables, putting party favors at each place.
    Now they were singing their welcome to their guests in the winter night. Their clothes were aromatic with the feast they had been preparing. They were dressed half for battle, half for tennis or croquet. They were so elated by their own hospitality, and by all the goodies waiting inside, that they did not take a good look at their guests while they sang. And they imagined that they were singing to fellow officers fresh from the fray.
    They wrestled the Americans toward the shed door affectionately, filling the night with manly blather and brotherly rodomontades. They called them 'Yank,' told them 'Good show,' promised them that 'Jerry was on the run,' and so on.
    Billy Pilgrim wondered dimly who Jerry was.

    Now he was indoors., next to an iron cookstove that was glowing cherry red. Dozens of teapots were boiling there. Some of them had whistles. And there was a witches' cauldron full of golden soup. The soup was thick. Primeval bubbles surfaced it with lethargical majesty as Billy Pilgrim stared.
    There were long tables set for a banquet. At each place was a bowl made from a can that had once contained powdered milk. A smaller can was a cup. A taller, more slender can was a tumbler. Each tumbler was filled with warm milk.
    At each place was a safety razor, a washcloth, a package of razor blades, a chocolate bar, two cigars, a bar of soap,, ten cigarettes, a book of matches, a pencil and a candle.
    Only the candles and the soap were of German origin. They had a ghostly, opalescent similarity. The British had no way of knowing it, but the candles and the soap were made from the fat of rendered Jews and Gypsies and fairies and communists, and other enemies of the State.
    So it goes.

    The banquet hall was illuminated by candlelight. There were heaps of fresh baked white bread on the tables, gobs of butter, pots of marmalade. There were platters of sliced beef from cans. Soup and scrambled eggs and hot marmalade pie were yet to come.
    And, at the far end of the shed, Billy saw pink arches with azure draperies hanging between them, and an enormous clock, and two golden thrones, and a bucket and a mop.  It was in this setting that the evening's entertainment would take place, a musical version of Cinderella, the most popular story ever told.

    Billy Pilgrim was on fire, having stood too close to the glowing stove. The hem of his little coat was burning. It was a quiet, patient sort of fire-like the burning of punk.
    Billy wondered ff there was a telephone somewhere. He wanted to call his mother, to tell her he was alive and well.

    There was silence now, as the Englishmen looked in astonishment at the frowsy creatures they had so lustily waltzed inside. One of the Englishmen saw that Billy was on fire. 'You're on fire lad!' he said, and he got Billy away from the stove and beat out the sparks with his hands.
    When Billy made no comment on this, the Englishman asked him, 'Can you talk? Can you hear?'
    Billy nodded.
    The Englishman touched him exploratorily here and there, filled with pity. 'My God-what have they done to you, lad? This isn't a man. It's a broken kite.'
    'Are you really an American?' said the Englishman.
    'Yes,' said Billy.
    'And your rank?'
    'Private.'
    'What became of your boots, lad?'
    'I don't remember.'
    'Is that coat a joke?'
    'Sir?'
    'Where did you get such a thing?'
    Billy had to think hard about that. 'They gave it to me,' he said at last.
    'Jerry gave it to you?'
    'Who? '
    'The Germans gave it to you?'
    'Yes.'
    Billy didn't like the questions. They were fatiguing.
    'Ohhhh-Yank, Yank, Yank,' said the Englishman, 'that coat was an insult,
    'Sir? '
    'It was a deliberate attempt to humiliate you. You mustn't let Jerry do things like that.'
    Billy Pilgrim swooned.

    Billy came to on a chair facing the stage. He I had somehow eaten, and now he was watching Cinderella. Some part of him had evidently been enjoying the performance for quite a while. Billy was laughing hard.
    The women in the play were really men, of course. The clock had just struck midnight and Cinderella was lamenting

'Goodness me, the clock has struck-
Alackaday, and fuck my luck.'

     Billy found the couplet so comical that he not only laughed-he shrieked. He went on shrieking until he was carried out of the shed and into another, where the hospital was. It was a six-bed hospital. There weren't any other patients in there.

    Billy was put to bed and tied down, and given a shot of morphine. Another American volunteered to watch over him. This volunteer was Edgar Derby, the high school teacher who would be shot to death in Dresden. So it goes.
    Derby sat on a three-legged stool. He was given a book to read. The book was The Red Badge of Courage, by Stephen Crane. Derby had read it before. Now he read it again while Billy Pilgrim entered a morphine paradise.

    Under morphine, Billy had a dream of giraffes in a garden. The giraffes were following gravel paths, were pausing to munch sugar pears from treetops. Billy was a giraffe, too. He ate a pear. It was a hard one. It fought back against his grinding teeth. It snapped in juicy protest.
    The giraffes accepted Billy as one of their own, as a harmless creature as preposterously specialized as themselves. Two approached him from opposite sides, leaned against him. They had long, muscular upper lips which they could shape like the bells of bugles. They kissed him with these. They were female giraffes-cream and lemon yellow. They had horns like doorknobs. The knobs were covered with velvet.
    Why?

    Night came to the garden of the giraffes, and Billy Pilgrim slept without dreaming for a while, and then he traveled in time.  He woke up with his head under a blanket in a ward for nonviolent mental patients in a veterans' hospital near Lake Placid, New York.  It was springtime in 1948, three years after the end of the war.
    Billy uncovered his head. The windows of the ward were open. Birds were twittering outside. 'Poo-tee-weet?' one asked him. The sun was high. There were twenty-nine other patients assigned to the ward, but they were all outdoors now, enjoying the day. They were free to come and go as they pleased, to go home, even., if they liked-and so was Billy Pilgrim. They had come here voluntarily, alarmed by the outside world.
    Billy had committed himself in the middle of his final year at the Ilium School of Optometry. Nobody else suspected that he was going crazy. Everybody else thought he looked fine and was acting fine. Now he was in the hospital. The doctors agreed: He was going crazy.
    They didn't think it had anything to do with the war. They were sure Billy was going to pieces because his father had thrown him into the deep end of the Y.M.C.A. swimming pool when he was a little boy, and had then taken him to the rim of the Grand Canyon.
    The man assigned to the bed next to Billy's was a former infantry captain named Eliot Rosewater. Rosewater was sick and tired of being drunk all the time.
    It was Rosewater who introduced Billy to science fiction, and in particular to the writings of Kilgore Trout. Rosewater had a tremendous collection of science-fiction paperbacks under his bed. He had brought them to the hospital in a steamer trunk. Those beloved, frumpish books gave off a smell that permeated the ward-like flannel pajamas that hadn't been changed for a month, or like Irish stew.

    Kilgore Trout became Billy's favorite living author, and science fiction became the only sort of tales he could read.
    Rosewater was twice as smart as Billy., but he and Billy were dealing with similar crises in similar ways. They had both found life meaningless, partly because of what they had seen in war. Rosewater., for instance, had shot a fourteen-year-old fireman, mistaking him for a German soldier. So it goes. And Billy had seen the greatest massacre in European history, which was the firebombing of Dresden. So it goes.
    So they were trying to re-invent themselves and their universe. Science fiction was a big help.
    Rosewater said an interesting thing to Billy one time about a book that wasn't science fiction. He said that everything there was to know about life was in The Brothers Karamazov, by Feodor Dostoevsky.  'But that isn't enough any more.' said Rosewater.

    Another time Billy heard Rosewater say to a psychiatrist, 'I think you guys are going to have to come up with a lot of wonderful new lies, or people just aren't going to want to go on living.'

    There was a still life on Billy's bedside table-two pills, an ashtray with three lipstick-stained cigarettes in it, one cigarette Still burning, and a glass of water. The water was dead. So it goes. Air was trying to get out of that dead water. Bubbles were clinging to the walls of the glass, too weak to climb out.
    The cigarettes belonged to Billy's chain-smoking mother. She had sought the ladies' room, which was off the ward for WACS and WAVES and SPARS and WAFS who had gone bananas. She would be back at any moment now.
    Billy covered his head with his blanket again. He always covered his head when his mother came to see him in the mental ward-always got much sicker until she went away. It wasn't that she was ugly, or had bad breath or a bad personality. She was a perfectly nice, standard-issue, brown-haired, white woman with a high-school education.
    She upset Billy simply by being his mother. She made him feel embarrassed and ungrateful and weak because she had gone to so much trouble to give him life, and to keep that life going, and Billy didn't really like life at all.


    Billy heard Eliot Rosewater come in and lie down. Rosewater's bedsprings talked a lot about that. Rosewater was a big man, but not very powerful. He looked as though he might be made out of nose putty.
    And then Billy's mother came back from the ladies' room, sat down on a chair between Billy's and Rosewater's bed. Rosewater greeted her with melodious warmth, asked how she was today. He seemed delighted to hear that she was fine. He was experimenting with being ardently sympathetic with everybody he met. He thought that might make the world a slightly more pleasant place to live in. He called Billy's mother 'dear.' He was experimenting with calling everybody 'dear.'
    Some day' she promised Rosewater., "I'm going to come in here, and Billy is going to uncover his head, and do you know what he's going to say?'
    'What's he going to say, dear?'
    'He's going to say, "Hello, Mom," and he's going to smile. He's going to say, "Gee, it's good to see you, Mom. How have you been?"'
    'Today could -be the day.'
    'Every night I pray.'
    'That's a good thing to do.'
    'People would be surprised ff they knew how much in this world was due to prayers.'
    'You never said a truer word, dear.'
    'Does your mother come to see you often?'
    'My mother is dead,' said Rosewater. So it goes.
    'I'm sorry.'
    'At least she had a happy life as long as it lasted.'
    'That's a consolation, anyway.'
    'Yes.'
    'Billy's father is dead., you know, said Billy's mother. So it goes.
    'A boy needs a father.'
    And on and on it went-that duet between the dumb, praying lady and the big, hollow man so full of loving echoes.

    'He was at the top of his class when this happened,' said Billy's mother.
    'Maybe he. was working too hard.' said Rosewater. He held a book he wanted to read, but he was much too polite to read and talk, too, easy as it was to give Billy's mother satisfactory answers. The book was Maniacs in the Fourth Dimension, by Kilgore Trout. It was about people whose mental diseases couldn't be treated because the causes of the diseases were all in the fourth dimension., and three-dimensional Earthling doctors couldn't see those causes at all, or even imagine them.
    One thing Trout said that Rosewater liked very much was that there really were vampires and werewolves and goblins and angels and so on, but that they were in the fourth dimension. So was William Blake, Rosewater's favorite poet, according to Trout. So were heaven and hell.

    'He's engaged to a very rich girl,' said Billy's mother.
    'Thats good,' said Rosewater. 'Money can be a great comfort sometimes.'
    'It really can.'
    'Of course it can.'
    'It isn't much fun if you have to pinch every penny till it screams.
    'It's nice to have a little breathing room.'
    'Her father owns the optometry school where Billy was going. He also owns six offices around our part of the state. He flies his own plane and has a summer place up on Lake George.'
    'That's a beautiful lake.'

    Billy fell asleep under his blanket. When he woke up again, he was tied to the bed in the hospital back in prison. He opened one eye, saw poor old Edgar Derby reading The Red Badge of Courage by candlelight.
    Billy closed that one eye saw in his memory of the future poor old Edgar Derby in front of a firing squad in the ruins of Dresden. There were only four men in that squad. Billy had heard that one man in each firing squad was customarily given a rifle loaded with blank cartridge. Billy didn't think there would be a blank cartridge issued in a squad that small, in a war that old.

    Now the head Englishman came into the hospital to check on Billy. He was an infantry colonel captured at Dunkirk. It was he who had given Billy morphine. There wasn't a real doctor in the compound, so the doctoring was up to him. 'How's the patient?' he asked Derby.
    'Dead to the world.'
    'But not actually dead.'
    'No.'
    'How nice-to feel nothing, and still get full credit for being alive.'
    Derby now came to lugubrious attention.
    'No, no-please-as you were. With only two men for each officer, and all the men sick, I think we can do without the usual pageantry between officers and men.'
    Derby remained standing. 'You seem older than the rest,' said the colonel.
    Derby told him he was forty-five, which was two years older than the colonel. The colonel said that the other Americans had all shaved now, that Billy and Derby were the only two still with beards.  And he said, 'You know we've had to imagine the war here, and we have imagined that it was being fought by aging men like ourselves. We had forgotten that wars were fought by babies. When I saw those freshly shaved faces, it was a shock "My God, my God-" I said to myself. "It's the Children's Crusade."'
    The colonel asked old Derby how he had been captured, and Derby told a tale of being in a clump of trees with about a hundred other frightened soldiers. The battle had been going on for five days. The hundred had been driven into the trees by tanks.
    Derby described the incredible artificial weather that Earthlings sometimes create for other Earthlings when they don't want those other Earthlings to inhabit Earth any more. Shells were bursting in the treetops with terrific bangs, he said, showering down knives and needles and razorblades. Little lumps of lead in copper jackets were crisscrossing the woods under the shellbursts, zipping along much faster than sound.
    A lot of people were being wounded or killed. So it goes.
    Then the shelling stopped, and a hidden German with a loudspeaker told the Americans to put their weapons down and come out of the woods with their hands on the top of their heads, or the shelling would start again. It wouldn't stop until everybody in there was dead.
    So the Americans put their weapons down, and they came out of the woods with their hands on top of their heads, because they wanted to go on living, if they possibly could.

    Billy traveled in time back to the veterans' hospital again. The blanket was over his head. It was quiet outside the blanket. "Is my mother gone?' said Billy.
    'Yes.'
    Billy peeked out from under his blanket. His fiance was out there now, sitting on the visitor's chair. Her name was Valencia Merble. Valencia was the daughter of the owner of the Ilium School of Optometry. She was rich. She was as big as a house because she couldn't stop eating. She was eating now. She was eating a Three Musketeers Candy Bar. She was wearing trifocal lenses in harlequin frames, and the frames were trimmed with rhinestones. The glitter of the rhinestones was answered by the glitter of the diamond in her engagement ring. The diamond was insured for eighteen hundred dollars. Billy had found that diamond in Germany. It was booty of war.
    Billy didn't want to marry ugly Valencia.  She was one of the symptoms of his disease.  He knew he was going crazy, when he heard himself proposing marriage to her., when he begged her to take the diamond ring and be his companion for life.

    Billy said, 'Hello,' to her, and she asked him if he wanted some candy, and he said, 'No, thanks.'
    She asked him how he was, and he said, 'Much better, thanks.' She said that everybody at the Optometry School was sorry he was sick and hoped he would be well soon, and Billy said, 'When you see 'em, tell 'em, "Hello."'
    She promised she would.

    She asked him if there was anything she could bring him from the outside, and he said, 'No. I have just about everything I want.'
    'What about books?' said Valencia.
    'I'm right next to one of the biggest private libraries in the world,' said Billy, meaning Eliot Rosewater's collection of science fiction.
    Rosewater was on the next bed, reading, and Billy drew him into the conversation, asked him what he was reading this time.
    So Rosewater told him. It was The Gospel from Outer Space, by Kilgore Trout. It was about a visitor from outer space, shaped very much like a Tralfamadorian by the way. The visitor from outer space made a serious study of Christianity, to learn, if he could, why Christians found it so easy to be cruel. He concluded that at least part of the trouble was slipshod storytelling in the New Testament. He supposed that the intent of the Gospels was to teach people, among other things, to be merciful, even to the lowest of the low.
    But the Gospels actually taught this:
    Before you kill somebody, make absolutely sure he isn't well connected. So it goes.

    The flaw in the Christ stories, said the visitor from outer space, was that Christ, who didn't look like much, was actually the Son of the Most Powerful Being in the Universe. Readers understood that, so, when they came to the crucifixion, they naturally thought, and Rosewater read out loud again:
    Oh, boy-they sure picked the wrong guy to lynch that time!
    And that thought had a brother: 'There are right people to lynch.' Who? People not well connected. So it goes.

    The visitor from outer space made a gift to Earth of a new Gospel. In it, Jesus really was a nobody, and a pain in the neck to a lot of people with better connections than he had.  He still got to say all the lovely and puzzling things he said in the other Gospels.
    So the people amused themselves one day by nailing him to a cross and planting the cross in the ground. There couldn't possibly be any repercussions, the lynchers thought. The reader would have to think that, too, since the new Gospel hammered home again and again what a nobody Jesus was.
    And then, just before the nobody died, the heavens opened up, and there was thunder and lightning. The voice of God came crashing down. He told the people that he was adopting the bum as his son giving him the full powers and privileges of The Son of the Creator of the Universe throughout all eternity. God said this From this moment on, He will punish horribly anybody who torments a bum who has no connections!

    Billy's fiance had finished her Three Musketeers Candy Bar. Now she was eating a Milky Way.
    'Forget books,' said Rosewater, throwing that particular book under his bed. 'The hell with 'em.'
    'That sounded like an interesting one,' said Valencia.
    Jesus-if Kilgore Trout could only write!' Rosewater exclaimed. He had a point: Kilgore Trout's unpopularity was deserved. His prose was frightful. Only his ideas were good.

    'I don't think Trout has ever been out of the country, ' Rosewater went on. 'My God-he writes about Earthlings all the time, and they're all Americans. Practically nobody on is an American.'
    'Where does he live?" Valencia asked.
    'Nobody knows,' Rosewater replied. 'I'm the only person who ever heard of him, as far as I can tell. No two books have the same publisher, and every time I write him in care of a publisher, the letter comes back because the publisher has failed.'
    He changed the subject now, congratulated Valencia on her engagement ring.
    'Thank you,' she said, and held it out so Rosewater could get a close look. 'Billy got that diamond in the war.'
    'That's the attractive thing about war,' said Rosewater. Absolutely everybody gets a little something.'
    With regard to the whereabouts of Kilgore Trout: he actually lived in Ilium, Billy's hometown, friendless and despised.  Billy would meet him by and by.
    'Billy' said Valencia Merble.
     'Hm?'
    'You want to talk about our silver pattern? '
    'Sure.'
    'I've got it narrowed down pretty much to either Royal Danish or Rambler Rose.'
    'Rambler Rose,' said Billy.
    'It isn't something we should rush into,' she said. 'I mean whatever we decide on, that's what we're going to have to live with the rest of our lives.'
    Billy studied the pictures. 'Royal Danish.' he said at last.
    'Colonial Moonlight is nice, too.'
    'Yes, it is,' said Billy Pilgrim.

    And Billy traveled in time to the zoo on Tralfamadore.  He was forty-four years old, on display under a geodesic dome.  He was reclining on the lounge chair which had been his cradle during his trip through space.  He was naked.  The Tralfamadorians were interested in his body-all of it.  There were thousands of them outside, holding up their little hands so that their eyes could see him.  Billy had been on Tralfamadore for six Earthling months now.  He was used to the crowd.
    Escape was out of the question.  The atmosphere outside the dome was cyanide, and Earth was 446,120,000,000,000,000 miles away.

    Billy was displayed there in the zoo in a simulated Earthling habitat.  Most of the furnishings had been stolen from the Sears & Roebuck warehouse in Iowa City, Iowa.  There was a color television set and a couch that could be converted into a bed.  There were end tables with lamps and ashtrays on them by the couch.  There was a home bar and two stools.  There was a little pool table.  There was wall-to-wall carpeting in federal gold, except in the kitchen and bathroom areas and over the iron manhole cover in the center of the floor.  There were magazines arranged in a fan on the coffee table in front of the couch.
    There was a stereophonic phonograph.  The phonograph worked.  The television didn't.  There was a picture Of one cowboy g another one pasted to the television tube.  So it goes.
    There were no wall in the dome, nor place for Billy to hide. The mint green bathroom fixtures were right out in the open.  Billy got off his lounge chair now, went into the bathroom and took a leak.  The crowd went wild.

    Billy brushed his teeth on Tralfamadore, put in his partial denture, and went into his kitchen.  His bottled-gas range and his refrigerator and his dishwasher were mint green, too.  There was a picture painted on the door of the refrigerator.  The refrigerator had come that way.  It was a picture of a Gay Nineties couple on a bicycle built for two.
Billy looked at that picture now, tried to think something about the couple.  Nothing came to him.  There didn't seem to be anything to think about those two people.

    Billy ate a good breakfast from cans.  He washed his cup and plate and knife and fork and spoon and saucepan, put them away.  Then he did exercises he had learned in the Army-straddle jumps, deep knee bends, sit-ups and push-ups.  Most Tralfamadorians had no way of knowing Bill's body and face were not beautiful.  They supposed that he was a splendid specimen.  This had a pleasant effect on Billy, who began to enjoy his body for the first time.
    He showered after his exercises and trimmed his toenails.  He shaved and sprayed deodorant under his arms, while a zoo guide on a raised platform outside explained what Billy was doing-and why.  The guide was lecturing telepathically, simply standing there, sending out thought waves to the crowd.  On the platform with him was the little keyboard instrument with which he would relay questions to Billy from the crowd.
Now the first question came-from the speaker on the television set: 'Are you happy here?'
    'About as happy as I was on Earth,' said Billy Pilgrim, which was true.

    There were fives sexes on Tralfamadore, each of them performing a step necessary in the creation of a new individual.  They looked identical to Billy-because their sex differences were all in the fourth dimension.
    One of the biggest moral bombshells handed to Billy by the Tralfamadorians, incidentally, had to do with sex on Earth.  They said their flying-saucer crews had identified no fewer than seven sexes on Earth, each essential to reproduction.  Again: Billy couldn't possibly imagine what five of those seven sexes had to do with the making of a baby, since they were sexually active only in the fourth dimension.
    The Tralfamadorians tried to give Billy clues that would help him imagine sex in the invisible dimension.  They told him that there could be no Earthling babies without male homosexuals.  There could be babies without female homosexuals.  There couldn't be babies without women over sixty-five years old.  There could be babies without men over sixty-five.  There couldn't be babies without other babies who had lived an hour or less after birth.  And so on.
    It was gibberish to Billy.

    There was a lot that Billy said that was gibberish to the Tralfamadorians, too.  They couldn't imagine what time looked like to him.  Billy had given up on explaining that.  The guide outside had to explain as best he could.
    The guide invited the crowd to imagine that they were looking across a desert at a mountain range on a day that was twinkling bright and clear.  They could look at a peak or a bird or a cloud, at a stone right in front of them, or even down into a canyon behind them.  But among them was this poor Earthling, and his head was encased in a steel sphere which he could never take off.  There was only one eyehole through which he could look, and welded to that eyehole were six feet of pipe.
    This was only the beginning of Billy's miseries in the metaphor.  He was also strapped to a steel lattice which was bolted to a flatcar on rails, And there was no way he could turn his head or touch the pipe.  The far end of the pipe rested on a bi-pod which was also bolted to the flatcar.  All Billy could see was the dot at the end of the pipe.  He didn't know he was on a flatcar, didn't even know there was anything peculiar about his situation.
    The flatcar sometimes crept, sometimes went extremely fast, often stopped-went uphill, downhill, around curves, along straightaways.  Whatever poor Billy saw through the pipe, he had no choice but to say to himself, 'That's life.'

    Billy expected the Tralfamadorians to be baffled and alarmed by all the wars and other forms of murder on Earth.  He expected them to fear that the Earthling combination of ferocity and spectacular weaponry might eventually destroy part or maybe all of the innocent Universe.  Science fiction had led him to expect that.
    But the subject of war never came up until Billy brought it up himself.  Somebody in the zoo crowd asked him through the lecturer what the most valuable thing he had learned on Tralfamadore was so far, and Billy replied, 'How the inhabitants of a whole planet can live in peace I As you know, I am from a planet that has been engaged in senseless slaughter since the beginning of time.  I myself have seen the bodies of schoolgirls who were boiled alive in a water tower by my own countrymen, who were proud of fighting pure evil at the time. ' This was true.  Billy saw the boiled bodies in Dresden.  'And I have lit my way in a prison at night with candles from the fat of human beings who were butchered by the brothers and fathers of those school girls who were boiled.  Earthlings must be the terrors of the Universe!  If other planets aren't now in danger from Earth, they soon will be.  So tell me the secret so I can take it back to Earth and save us all: How can a planet live at peace?'
    Billy felt that he had spoken soaringly.  He was baffled when he saw the Tralfamadorians close their little hands on their eyes.  He knew from past experience what this meant: He was being stupid.

    'Would-would you mind telling me,' he said to the guide, much deflated, 'what was so stupid about that?'
    'We know how the Universe ends,' said the guide, 'and Earth has nothing to do with it, except that it gets wiped out, too.'
    'How-how does the Universe end?' said Billy.
    'We blow it up, experimenting with new fuels for our flying saucers.  A Tralfamadorian test pilot presses a starter button, and the whole Universe disappears.' So it goes.

    "If You know this," said Billy, 'isn't there some way you can prevent it?  Can't you keep the pilot from pressing the button?'
    'He has always pressed it, and he always will.  We always let him and we always will let him.  The moment is structured that way.'

    'So,' said Billy gropingly, I suppose that the idea of, preventing war on Earth is stupid, too. '
    'Of course.'
    'But you do have a peaceful planet here.'
    'Today we do.  On other days we have wars as horrible as any you've ever seen or read about.  There isn't anything we can do about them, so we simply don't look at them.  We ignore them.  We spend eternity looking at pleasant moments-like today at the zoo.  Isn't this a nice moment?'
    'Yes.'
    'That's one thing Earthlings might learn to do, if they tried hard enough: Ignore the awful times, and concentrate on the good ones.'
    'Um,' said Billy Pilgrim.

    Shortly after he went to sleep that night, Billy traveled in time to another moment which was quite nice, his wedding night with the former Valencia Merble.  He had been out of the veterans' hospital for six months.  He was all well.  He had graduated from the Ilium School of Optometry-third in his class of forty-seven.
    Now he was in bed with Valencia in a delightful studio apartment which was built on the end of a wharf on Cape Ann, Massachusetts.  Across the water were the lights of Gloucester.  Billy was on top of Valencia, making love to her. One result of this act would be the birth of Robert Pilgrim, who would become a problem in high school, but who would then straighten out as a member of the famous Green Berets.
    Valencia wasn't a time-traveler, but she did have a lively imagination. While Billy was making love to her, she imagined that she was a famous woman in history. She was being Queen Elizabeth the First of England, and Billy was supposedly Christopher Columbus.

    Billy made a noise like a small, rusty hinge.  He had just emptied his seminal vesicles into Valencia, had contributed his share of the Green Beret According to the Tralfamadorians, of course, the Green Beret would have seven parents in all.
    Now he rolled off his huge wife, whose rapt expression did not change when he departed.  He lay with the buttons of his spine along the edge of the mattress, folded his hands behind his head.  He was rich now.  He had been rewarded for marrying a girl nobody in his right mind would have married.  His father-in-law had given him a new Buick Roadmaster, an all-electric home, and had made him manager of his most prosperous office, his Ilium office, where Billy could expect to make at least thirty thousand dollars a year.  That was good.  His father had been only a barber.
    As his mother said, "The Pilgrims are coming up in the world,'
    The honeymoon was taking place in the bittersweet mysteries of Indian summer in New England.  The lovers' apartment had one romantic wall which was all French doors.  They opened onto a balcony and the oily harbor beyond.
    A green and orange dragger, black in the night, grumbled and drummed past their balcony, not thirty feet from their wedding bed.  It was going to sea with only its running lights on.  Its empty holds were resonant, made the song of the engines rich and loud.  The wharf began to sing the same song, and then the honeymooners' headboard sang, too.  And it continued to sing long after the dragger was gone.
    'Thank you,' said Valencia at last.  The headboard was singing a mosquito song.
    'You're welcome.'
    'It was nice.'
    'I'm glad.'
    Then she began to cry.
    'What's the matter?'
    'I'm so happy.'
    'Good.'
    'I never thought anybody would marry me.'
    'Um,' said Billy Pilgrim.

    I'm going to lose weight for you,' she said.
    'What?'
    'I'm going to go on a diet.  I'm going to become beautiful for you.'
    'I like you just the way you are.'
    'Do you really?'
    'Really,' said Billy Pilgrim.  He had already seen a lot of their marriage, thanks to time-travel, knew that it was going to be at least bearable all the way.

    A great motor yacht named the Scheherezade now slid past the marriage bed.  The song its engines sang was a very low organ note. All her lights were on.
    Two beautiful people, a young man and a young woman in evening clothes, were at the rail hi the stem, loving each other and their dreams and the wake.  They were honeymooning, too.  They were Lance Rumfoord., of Newport, Rhode Island, and his bride,, the former Cynthia Landry., who had been a childhood sweetheart of John F. Kennedy in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts.
    There was a slight coincidence here.  Billy Pilgrim would later share a hospital room with Rumfoord's uncle, Professor Bertram Copeland Rumfoord of Harvard, official Historian of the United States Air Force.

    When the beautiful people were past, Valencia questioned her funny-looking husband about war.  It was a simple-minded thing for a female Earthling to do, to associate sex and glamor with war.
    'Do you ever think about the war?' she said, laying a hand on his thigh.
    'Sometimes,' said Billy Pilgrim.

    'I look at you sometimes,' said Valencia, 'and I get a funny feeling that you're full of secrets.'
    'I'm not,' said Billy. This was a lie, of course.  He hadn't told anybody about all the time traveling he'd done, about Tralfamadore and so on.
    'You must have secrets about the war.  Or, not secrets, I guess, but things you don't want to talk about.'
    'No.'
    'I'm proud you were a soldier.  Do you know that?'
    'Good.'
    'Was it awful?'
    'Sometimes.' A crazy thought now occurred to Billy. The truth of it startled him. It would make a good epitaph for Billy Pilgrim-and for me, too.
    'Would you talk about the war now, if I wanted you to?' said Valencia.  In a tiny cavity in her great body she was assembling the materials for a Green Beret.
    'It would sound like a dream,', said Billy.  'Other people's dreams aren't very interesting usually.'
    'I heard you tell Father one time about a German firing squad.' She was referring to the execution of poor old Edgar Derby.
    'Um.'
    'You had to bury him? '
    'Yes.'
    Did he see you with your shovels before he was shot?'
    'Yes.'
    'Did he say anything?'


EVERYTHING WAS BEAUTIFUL, AND NOTHING HURT

    'No.'
    'Was he scared?'
    'They had him doped up.  He was sort of glassy-eyed.'
    And they pinned a target to him?'
    A piece of paper,' said Billy.  He got out of bed, said, 'Excuse me, ' went to the darkness of the bathroom to take a leak.  He groped for the light, realized as he felt the rough wall that he had traveled back to 1944, to the prison hospital again.

    The candle in the hospital had gone out.  Poor old Edgar Derby had fallen asleep on the cot next to Billy's.  Billy was out of bed, groping along a wall, trying to find a way out because he had to take a leak so badly.
    He suddenly found a door, which opened, let him reel out into the prison night.  Billy was loony with time-travel and morphine.  He delivered himself to a barbed-wire fence which snagged him in a dozen places.  Billy tried to back away from it but the barbs wouldn't let go.  So Billy did a silly little dance with the fence, taking a step this way, then that way, then returning to the beginning again.
    A Russian, himself out in the night to take a leak, saw Billy dancing-from the other side of the fence.  He came over to the curious scarecrow, tried to talk with it gently, asked it what country it was from.  The scarecrow paid no attention, went on dancing.  So the Russian undid the snags one b y one, and the scarecrow danced off into the night again without a word of thanks.
    The Russian waved to him, and called after him in Russian, 'Good-bye.'

    Billy took his pecker out, there in the prison night, and peed and peed on the ground.  Then he put it away again, more or less, and contemplated a new problem: Where had he come from, and where should he go now?
    Somewhere in the night there were cries of grief. With nothing better to do, Billy shuffled in their direction.  He wondered what tragedy so many had found to lament out of doors.
    Billy was approaching, without knowing it, the back of the latrine. It consisted of a one-rail fence with twelve buckets underneath it. The fence was sheltered on three sides by a screen of scrap lumber and flattened tin cans. The open side faced the black tarpaper wall of the shed where the feast had, taken place.
    Billy moved along the screen and reached a point where he could see a message freshly painted on the tarpaper wall. The words were written with the same pink paint which had brightened the set for Cinderella.  Billy's perceptions were so unreliable that he saw the words as hanging in air, painted on a transparent curtain, perhaps.  And there were lovely silver dots on the curtain, too.  These were really nailheads holding the tarpaper to the shed.  Billy could not imagine how the curtain was supported in nothingness, and he supposed that the magic curtain and the theatrical grief were part of some religious ceremony he knew nothing about.
    Here is what the message said:

PLEASE LEAVE
THIS LATRINE AS
TIDY AS YOU
FOUND IT!

    Billy looked inside the latrine. The wailing was coming from in there. The place was crammed with Americans who had taken their pants down. The welcome feast had made them as sick as volcanoes. The buckets were full or had been kicked over.
    An American near Billy wailed that he had excreted everything but his brains.  Moments later he said, 'There they go, there they go.' He meant his brains.
    That was I. That was me. That was the author of this book.

    Billy reeled away from his vision of Hell.  He passed three Englishmen who were watching the excrement festival from a distance. They were catatonic with disgust.
    'Button your pants!' said one as Billy went by.
So Billy buttoned his pants.  He came to the door of the little hospital by accident.  He went through the door,, and found himself honeymooning again, going from the bathroom back to bed with his bride on Cape Ann.
    'I missed you' said Valencia.
    'I missed you,' said Billy Pilgrim.

    Billy and Valencia went to sleep nestled like spoons, and Billy traveled in time back to the train ride he had taken in 194 4 from maneuvers in South Carolina to his father's funeral in Ilium. He hadn't seen Europe or combat yet. This was still in the days of steam locomotives.
    Billy had to change trains a lot. All the trains were slow. The coaches stunk of coal smoke and rationed tobacco and rationed booze and the farts of people eating wartime food.  The upholstery of the iron seats was bristly, and Billy couldn't sleep much.  He got to sleep soundly when he was only three hours from Ilium, with his legs splayed toward the entrance of the busy dining car.
    The porter woke him up when the train reached Ilium. Billy staggered off with his duffel bag, and then he stood on the station platform next to the porter, trying to wake up.
    'Have a good nap, did you?' said the porter.
    'Yes,' said Billy.
    'Man,' said the porter, 'you sure had a hard-on.'

    At three in the morning on Bill's morphine night in prison, a new patient was carried into the hospital by two lusty Englishmen. He was tiny. He was Paul Lazzaro, the polka-dotted car thief from Cicero, Illinois. He had been caught stealing cigarettes from under the pillow of an Englishman. The Englishman, half asleep, had broken Lazzaro's right arm and knocked him unconscious.
    The Englishman who had done this was helping to carry Lazzaro in now. He had fiery red hair and no eyebrows.  He had been Cinderella's Blue Fairy Godmother in the play.  Now he supported his half of Lazzaro with one hand while he closed the door behind himself with the other. 'Doesn't weigh as much as a chicken,' he said.
    The Englishman with Lazzaro's feet was the colonel who had given Billy his knock-out shot.
    The Blue Fairy Godmother was embarrassed, and angry, too. 'If I'd known I was fighting a chicken,' he said, 'I wouldn't have fought so hard.'
    'Um.'
    The Blue Fairy Godmother spoke frankly about how disgusting all the Americans were.  'Weak, smelly, self-pitying-a pack of sniveling, dirty, thieving bastards,' he said.  'They're worse than the bleeding Russians.'
    'Do seem a scruffy lot,' the colonel agreed.

    A German major came in now.  He considered the Englishmen as close friends. He visited them nearly every day, played games with them, lectured to them on German history, played their piano, gave them lessons in conversational German.  He told them often that, if it weren't for their civilized company, he would go mad.  His English was splendid.
    He was apologetic about the Englishmen's having to put up with the American enlisted men.  He promised them that they would not be inconvenienced for more than a day or two, that the Americans would soon be shipped to Dresden as contract labor.  He had a monograph with him, published by the German Association of Prison Officials.  It was a report on the behavior in Germany of American enlisted men as prisoners of war.  It was written by a former American who had risen high in the German Ministry of Propaganda.  His name was Howard W. Campbell, Jr. He would later hang himself while awaiting trial as a war criminal.
    So it goes.

    While the British colonel set Lazzaro's broken arm and mixed plaster for the cast, the German major translated out loud passages from Howard W. Campbell, Jr.'s monograph.  Campbell had been a fairly well-known playwright at one time.  His opening line was this one:
    America is the wealthiest nation on Earth, but its people are mainly poor, and poor Americans are urged to hate themselves To quote the American humorist Kin Hubbard, 'It ain't no disgrace to be poor, but might as well be.' It is in fact a crime for an American to be poor, even though America is a nation of poor.  Every other nation has folk traditions of men who were poor but extremely wise and virtuous, and therefore more estimable than anyone with power and gold.  No such tales are told by the American poor.  They mock themselves and glorify their betters.  The meanest eating or drinking establishment, owned by a man who is himself poor, is very likely to have a sign on its wall asking this cruel question: 'If you're so smart, why ain't You rich? ' There will also be an American flag no larger than a child's hand-glued to a lollipop stick and, flying from the cash register.

    The author of the monograph, a native of Schenectady, New York, was said by some to have had the highest I.Q. of all the war criminals who were made to face a death by hanging. So it goes.
    Americans, like human beings everywhere, believe many things that are obviously untrue, the monograph went on. Their most destructive untruth is that it is very easy for any American to make money.  They will not acknowledge how in fact hard money is to come by, and, therefore, those who have no money blame and blame and blame themselves.  This inward blame has been a treasure for the rich and powerful, who have had to do less for their poor, publicly and privately, than any other ruling class since, say, Napoleonic times.
    Many novelties have come from America. The most startling of these, a thing without precedent, is a mass of undignified poor. They do not love one another because they do not love themselves. Once this is understood the disagreeable behavior of American enlisted men in German prisons ceases to be a mystery.

    Howard W. Cambell, Jr., now discussed the uniform of the American enlisted in the Second World War: Every other army in history, prosperous or not, has attempted to clothe even its lowliest soldiers so as to make them impressive to themselves and others as stylish experts in drinking and copulation and looting and sudden death. The American Army, however, sends its enlisted men out to fight and die in a modified business suit quite evidently made for another man, a sterilized but unpressed gift from a nose-holding charity which passes out clothing to drunks in the slums.
    When a dashingly-clad officer addresses such a frumpishly dressed bum, he scolds him, as an officer in an army must.  But the officer's contempt is not, as in 'other armies, avuncular theatricality.  It is a genuine expression of hatred for the poor, who have no one to blame for their misery but themselves.
    A prison administrator dealing with captured American enlisted men for the first time should be warned: Expect no brotherly love, even between brothers.  There will be no cohesion between the individuals.  Each will be a sulky child who often wishes he were dead

    Campbell told what the German experience with captured American enlisted men had been. They were known everywhere to be the most self-pitying, least fraternal and dirtiest of all prisoners of war, said Campbell. They were incapable of concerted action on their own behalf. They despised any leader from among their own number, refused to follow or even listen to him, on the grounds that he was no better than they were, that he should stop putting on airs.
    And so on. Billy Pilgrim went to sleep, woke up as a widower in his empty home in Ilium. His daughter Barbara was reproaching him for writing ridiculous letters to the newspapers.

    'Did you hear what I said?' Barbara inquired.  It was 1968 again.
    'Of course.' He had been dozing.
    'If you're going to act like a child, maybe we'll just have to treat you like a child.'
    'That isn't what happens next,' said Billy.
    'We'll see what happens next.' Big Barbara now embraced herself.  'It's awfully cold in here.  Is the heat on?'
    'The heat? '
    'The furnace-the thing in the basement, the thing that makes hot air that comes out of these registers. I don't think it's working.'
    'Maybe not.'
    'Aren't you cold?'
    'I hadn't noticed.'
    'Oh my God, you are a child. If we leave you alone here, you'll freeze to death, you'll starve to death.' And so on. It was very exciting for her, taking his dignity away in the name of love.

    Barbara called the oil-burner man, and she made Billy go to bed, made him promise to stay under the electric blanket until the heat came on. She set the control of the blanket at the highest notch, which soon made Billy's bed hot enough to bake bread in.
    When Barbara left, slamming the door behind her, Billy traveled in time to the zoo on Tralfamadore again. A mate has just been brought to him from Earth.  She was Montana Wildhack, a motion picture star.

    Montana was under heavy sedation. Tralfamadorians wearing gas masks brought her in, put her on Billy's yellow lounge chair; withdrew through his airlock. The vast crowd outside was delighted. All attendance records for the zoo were broken. Everybody on the planet wanted to see the Earthlings mate.
    Montana was naked, and so was Billy, of course.  He had a tremendous wang, incidentally.  You never know who'll get one.

    Now she fluttered her eyelids. Her lashes were like buggy whips. 'Where am I?' she said.
    'Everything is all right,' said Billy gently.  'Please don't be afraid.
    Montana had been unconscious during her trip from Earth.  The Tralfamadorians hadn't talked to her, hadn't shown themselves to her.  The last thing she remembered was sunning herself by a swimming pool in Palm Springs, California.  Montana was only twenty years old. Around her neck was a silver chain with a heart-shaped locket hanging from it-between her breasts.
    Now she turned her head to see the myriads of Tralfamadorians outside the dome.  They were applauding her by opening and closing their little green hands quickly.
    Montana screamed and screamed.

    All the little green hands closed fight, because Montana's terror was so unpleasant to see. The head zoo keeper ordered a crane operator, who was standing by, to drop a navy blue canopy over the dome, thus simulating Earthling night inside. Real night came to the zoo for only one Earthling hour out of every sixty-two.
    Billy switched on a floor lamp.  The light from the single source threw the baroque detailing of Montana's body into sharp relief. Billy was reminded of fantastic architecture in Dresden, before it was bombed.

    In time, Montana came to love and trust Billy Pilgrim. He did not touch her until she made it clear that she wanted him to. After she had been on Tralfamadore for what would have been an Earthling week, she asked him shyly if he wouldn't sleep with her. Which he did. It was heavenly.

    And Billy traveled in time from that delightful bed to a bed in 1968. It was his bed in Ilium, and the electric blanket was turned up high.  He was drenched in sweat, remembered groggily that his daughter had put him to bed, had told him to stay there until the oil burner was repaired.
    Somebody was knocking on his bedroom door.
    'Yes?' said Billy.
    'Oil-burner man.'
    'Yes?'
    'Its running good now. Heat's coming up.'
    'Good.'
    'Mouse ate through a wire from the thermostat'
    'I'll be darned.'
    Billy sniffed. His hot bed smelled like a mushroom cellar. He had had a wet dream about Montana Wildhack.

    On the morning after that wet dream, Billy decided to go back to work in his office in the shopping plaza. Business was booming as usual. His assistants were keeping up with it nicely. They were startled to see him. They had been told by his daughter that he might never practice again.
    But Billy went into his examining room briskly, asked that the first patient be sent in.  So they sent him one-a twelve-year old boy who was accompanied by his-widowed mother. They were strangers, new in town. Billy asked them a little about themselves, learned that the boy's father had been killed in Vietnam-in the famous five-day battle for Hill 875 near Dakto. So it goes.

    While he examined the boy's eyes, Billy told him matter-of-factly about his adventures on Tralfamadore, assured the fatherless boy that his father was very much alive still in moments the boy would see again and again.
    'Isn't that comforting?' Billy asked.
    And somewhere in there, the boy's mother went out and told the receptionist that Billy was evidently going crazy. Billy was taken home. His daughter asked him again, 'Father, Father, Father-what are we going to do with you?'

Six

Listen:
    Billy Pilgrim says he went to Dresden Germany, on the day after his morphine night in the British compound in the center of the extermination camp for Russian prisoners of war. Billy woke up at dawn on that day in January. There were no windows in the little hospital, and the ghostly candles had gone out. So the only light came from pin-prick holes in the walls, and from a sketchy rectangle that outlined the imperfectly fitted door. Little Paul Lazzaro, with a broken arm, snored on one bed. Edgar Derby, the high school teacher who would eventually he shot, snored on another.
    Billy sat up in bed. He had no idea what year it was or what planet he was on. Whatever the planet's name was, it was cold. But it wasn't the cold that had awakened Billy. It was animal magnetism which was making him shiver and itch. It gave him profound aches in his musculature, as though he had been exercising hard.
    The animal magnetism was coming from behind him. If Billy had had to guess as to the source, he would have said that there was a vampire bat hanging upside down on the wall behind him.
    Billy moved down toward the foot of his cot before turning to look at whatever it was. He didn't want the animal to drop into his face and maybe claw his eyes out or bite off his big nose. Then he turned. The source of the magnetism really did resemble a bat. It was Billy's impresario's coat with the fur collar. It was hanging from a nail.
    Billy now backed toward it again, looking at it over his shoulder, feeling the magnetism increase. Then he faced it, kneeling on his cot, dared to touch it here and there. He was seeking the exact source of the radiations.
    He found two small sources, two lumps an inch apart and hidden in the lining. One was shaped like a pea. The other was shaped like a tiny horseshoe. Billy received a message carried by the radiations. He was told not to find out what the lumps were. He was advised to be content with knowing that they could work miracles for him, provided he did not insist on learning their nature. That was all right with Billy Pilgrim. He was grateful. He was glad.

    Billy dozed, awakened in the prison hospital again. The sun was high. Outside were Golgotha sounds of strong men digging holes for upright timbers in hard, hard ground. Englishmen were building themselves a new latrine. They had abandoned their old latrine to the American d their theater the place where the feast had been held, too.
    Six Englishmen staggered through a hospital with a pool table on which several mattresses were piled. They were transferring it to living quarters attached to the hospital. They were followed by an Englishman dragging his mattress and carrying a dartboard.
    The man with the dartboard was the Blue Fairy Godmother who had injured little Paul Lazzaro. He stopped by Lazzaro's bed, asked Lazzaro how he was.
    Lazzaro told him he was going to have him killed after the war.
    'Oh? '
    'You made a big mistake,' said Lazzaro. 'Anybody touches me, he better kill me, or I'm gonna have him killed.'
    The Blue Fairy Godmother knew something about killing. He gave Lazzaro a careful smile. 'There is still time for me to kill you,' he said, 'if you really persuade me that it's the sensible thing to do.'
    'Why don't you go fuck yourself?'
    'Don't think I haven't tried,' the Blue Fairy Godmother answered.

    The Blue Fairy Godmother left, amused and patronizing. When he was gone, Lazzaro promised Billy and poor old Edgar Derby that he was going to have revenge, and that revenge was sweet.
    'It's the sweetest thing there is,' said Lazzaro. 'People fuck with me,' he said, 'and Jesus Christ are they ever fucking sorry. I laugh like hell. I don't care if it's a guy or a dame. If the President of the United States fucked around with me, I'd fix him good. You should have seen what I did to a dog one time.'
    'A dog?' said Billy.
    'Son of a bitch bit me. So 1 got me some steak, and I got me the spring out of a clock. I cut that spring up in little pieces. I put points on the ends of the pieces. They were sharp as razor blades. I stuck 'em into the steak-way inside. And I went past where they had the dog tied up. He wanted to bite me again. I said to him, 'Come on., doggie-let's be friends. Let's not be enemies any more.  I'm not mad." He believed me.'
    'He did?'
    'I threw him the steak. He swallowed it down in one big gulp. I waited around for ten minutes.' Now Lazzaro's eyes twinkled. 'Blood started coming out of his mouth. He started crying, and he rolled on the ground, as though the knives were on the outside of him instead of on the inside of him. Then he tried to bite out his own insides. I laughed, and I said to him, "You got the right idea now. Tear your own guts out, boy. That's me in there with all those knives."' So it goes.
    'Anybody ever asks you what the sweetest thing in life is-' said Lazzaro, 'it's revenge.'

    When Dresden was destroyed later on, incidentally, Lazzaro did not exult. He didn't have anything against the Germans, he said. Also, he said he liked to take his enemies one at a time. He was proud of never having hurt an innocent bystander. 'Nobody ever got it from Lazzaro,' he said, 'who didn't have it coming.'

    Poor old Edgar Derby, the high school teacher, got into the conversation now. He asked Lazzaro if he planned to feed the Blue Fairy Godmother clock springs and steak.
    'Shit,' said Lazzaro.
    'He's a pretty big man,' said Derby, who, of course, was a pretty big man himself.
    'Size don't mean a thing.'
    'You're going to shoot him?'
    'I'm gonna have him shot,' said Lazzaro. 'He'll get home after the war. He'll be a big hero. The dames'll be climbing all over him. He'll settle down. A couple of years'll go by. And then one day there'll be a knock on his door. He'll answer the door, and there'll be a stranger out there. The stranger'll ask him if he's so-and-so. When he says he is, the stranger'll say, "Paul Lazzaro sent me." And he'll pull out a gun and shoot his pecker off. The stranger'll let him think a couple of seconds about who Paul Lazzaro is and what life's gonna be like without a pecker. Then he'll shoot him once in the guts and walk away.' So it goes.

    Lazzaro said that he could have anybody in the world killed for a thousand dollars plus traveling expenses. He had a list in his head, he said.
    Derby asked him who all was on the list, and Lazzaro said, 'Just make fucking sure you don't get on it. just don't cross me, that's all.' There was a silence, and then he added, 'And don't cross my friends.'
    'You have friends?' Derby wanted to know.
    'In the war?' said Lazzaro. 'Yeah-I had a friend in the war. He's dead.' So it goes.
    'That's too bad.'
    Lazzaro's eyes were twinkling again. 'Yeah. He was my buddy on the boxcar. His name was Roland Weary. He died in my arms.' Now he pointed to Billy with his one mobile hand. 'He died on account of this silly cocksucker here. So I promised him
I'd have this silly cocksucker shot after the war.'
    Lazzaro erased with his hand anything Billy Pilgrim might be about to say. 'Just forget about it, kid,' he said. 'Enjoy life while you can. Nothing's gonna happen for maybe five, ten, fifteen, twenty years. But lemme give you a piece of advice: Whenever the doorbell rings, have somebody else answer the door.'

    Billy Pilgrim says now that this really is the way he is going to die, too. As a time-traveler, he has seen his own death many times, has described it to a tape recorder. The tape is locked up with his will and some other valuables in his safe-deposit box at the Ilium Merchants National Bank and Trust, he says.
    I, Billy Pilgrim, the tape begins, will die, have died and always will die on February thirteenth, 1976.
    At the time of his death, he says, he is in Chicago to address a large crowd on the subject of flying saucers and the true nature of time. His home is still in Ilium. He has had to cross three international boundaries in order to reach Chicago. The United States of America has been Balkanized, has been divided into twenty petty nations so that it will never again be a threat to world peace. Chicago has been hydrogen-bombed by Angry Chinamen. So it goes. It is all brand new.
    Billy is speaking before a capacity audience in a baseball park, which is covered by a geodesic dome. The flag of the country is behind him. It is a Hereford Bull on a field of green. Billy predicts his own death within an hour. He laughed about it, invites the crowd to laugh with him. 'It is high time I was dead..' he says. 'Many years ago.' he said, 'a certain man promised to have me killed. He is an old man now, living not far from here. He has read all the publicity associated with my appearance in your fair city. He is insane. Tonight he will keep his promise.'
    There are protests from the crowd.
    Billy Pilgrim rebukes them.  'If you protest, if you think that death is a terrible thing, then you have not understood a word I've said.' Now he closes his speech as he closes every speech with these words: 'Farewell, hello, farewell, hello.'
    There are police around him as he leaves the stage. They are there to protect him from the crush of popularity. No threats on his life have been made since 1945. The police offer to stay with him. They are floridly willing to stand in a circle around him all night, with their zap guns drawn.
    'No, no,' says Billy serenely. 'It is time for you to go home to your wives and children, and it is time for me to be dead for a little while-and then live again.' At that moment, Billy's high forehead is in the cross hairs of a high-powered laser gun. It is aimed at him from the darkened press box. In the next moment, Billy Pilgrim is dead. So it goes.
    So Billy experiences death for a while. It is simply violet light and a hum. There isn't anybody else there. Not even Billy Pilgrim is there.

    Then he swings back into life again, all the way back to an hour after his life was threatened by Lazzaro-in 1945. He has been told to get out of his hospital bed and dress, that he is well. He and Lazzaro and poor old Edgar Derby are to join their fellows in the theater. There they will choose a leader for themselves by secret ballot in a free election.

    Billy and Lazzaro and poor old Edgar Derby crossed the prison yard to the theater now. Billy was carrying his little coat as though it were a lady's muff. It was wrapped around and round his hands. He was the central clown in an unconscious travesty of that famous oil painting, 'The Spirit of '76.'
    Edgar Derby was writing letters home in his head, telling his Wife that he was alive and well, that she shouldn't worry, that the war was. nearly over, that he would soon be home.
    Lazzaro was talking to himself about people he was going to have killed after the war, and rackets he was going to work, and women he was going to make fuck Mm, whether they wanted to or not. If he had been a dog in a city, a policeman would have shot him and sent his head to a laboratory, to see if he had rabies. So it goes.
    As they neared the theater, they came upon an Englishman who was hacking a groove in the Earth with the heel of his boot. He was marking the boundary between the American and English sections of the compound. Billy and Lazzaro and Derby didn't have to ask what the line meant. It was a familiar symbol from childhood.

    The theater was paved with American bodies that nestled like spoons. Most of the Americans were in stupors or asleep. Their guts were fluttering, dry.
    'Close the fucking door,' somebody said to Billy. 'Were you born I'm a barn?'

    Billy closed it., took a hand from his muff, touched a stove. It was as cold as ice. The stage was still set for Cinderella. Azure curtains hung from the arches which were shocking pink. There were golden thrones and the dummy clock, whose hands were set at midnight. Cinderella's slippers, which were a man's boots painted silver, were capsized side by side under a golden throne.
    Billy and poor old Edgar Derby and Lazzaro had been in the hospital when the British passed out blankets and mattresses, so they had none. They had to improvise. The only space open to them was up on the stage, and they went up there, pulled the azure curtains down, made nests.
    Billy, curled in his azure nest., found himself staring at Cinderella's silver boots under a throne. And then he remembered that his shoes were ruined, that he needed boots. He hated to get out of his nest., but he forced himself to do it. He crawled to the boots on all fours, sat, tried them on.
    The boots fit perfectly. Billy Pilgrim was Cinderella, and Cinderella was Billy Pilgrim.

    Somewhere in there was a lecture on personal hygiene by the head Englishman., and then a free election. At least half the Americans went on snoozing through it all. The Englishman' got up on the stage, and he rapped on the arm of a throne with
a swagger stick, called, 'Lads, lads, lad I have your attention, please?' And so on.

    What the Englishman. said about survival was this 'If you stop taking pride 'm your appearance, you will very soon die.' He said that he had seen several men die in the following way: They ceased to stand up straight, then ceased to shave or wash, then ceased to get out of bed, then ceased to talk, then died. There is this much to be said for it: it is evidently a very easy and painless way to go.' So it goes.

    The Englishman said that he, when captured, had made and kept the following vows to himself: To brush his teeth twice a day, to shave once a day, to wash his face and hands before every meal and after going to the latrine, to polish his shoes once a day, to exercise for at least half an hour each morning and then move his bowels, and to look into a mirror frequently, frankly evaluating his appearance, particularly with respect to
posture.
    Billy Pilgrim heard all this while lying in his nest. He looked not at the Englishman's face but his ankles.
    'I envy you lads,' said the Englishman.
    Somebody laughed. Billy wondered what the joke was.
    'You lads are leaving this afternoon for Dresden-a beautiful city., I'm told. You won't be cooped up like us. You'll be out where the life is, and the food is certain to be more plentiful than here. If I may inject a personal note: It has been five years now since I have seen a tree or flower or woman or child-or a dog or a cat or a place of entertainment, or a human being doing useful work of any kind.
    'You needn't worry about bombs, by the way. Dresden is an open city. It is undefended, and contains no war industries or troop concentrations of any importance.'

    Somewhere in there, old Edgar Derby was elected head American. The Englishman called for nominations from the floor, and there weren't any. So he nominated Derby, praising him for his maturity and long experience in dealing with people. There were no further nominations, so the nominations were closed.
    'All in favor?'
    Two or three people said, 'Aye.'

    Then poor old Derby made a speech. He thanked the Englishman for his good advice, said he meant to follow it exactly. He said he was sure that all the other Americans would do the mm. He said that his primary responsibility now was to make damn well sure that everybody got home safely.
    'Go take a flying fuck at a rolling doughnut,' murmured Paul Lazzaro in his azure nest. 'Go take a flying fuck at the moon.'

    The temperature climbed startlingly that day. The noontime was balmy. The Germans brought soup and bread in two-wheeled carts which were pulled by Russians. The Englishmen sent over real coffee and sugar and marmalade and cigarettes and cigars, and the doors of the theater were left open, so the warmth could get in.
    The Americans began to feel much better. They were able to hold their food. And then it was time to go to Dresden. The Americans marched fairly stylishly out of the British compound. Billy Pilgrim again led the parade. He had silver boots now, and a muff, and a piece of azure curtain which he wore like a toga. Billy still had a beard. So did poor old Edgar Derby, who was beside him. Derby was imagining letters to home, his lips working tremulously.
    Dear Margaret-We are leaving for Dresden today. Don t worry. It will never be bombed. It is an open city. There was an election at noon, and guess what? And so on.

    They came to the prison railroad yard again. They had arrived on only two cars. They would depart far more comfortably on four. They saw the dead hobo again. He was frozen stiff in the weeds beside the track. He was in a fetal position, trying even in death to nestle like a spoon with others. There were no others now. He was nestling within thin air and cinders. Somebody had taken his boots. His bare feet were blue and ivory. It was all right, somehow, his being dead. So it goes.

    The trip to Dresden was a lark. It took only two hours. Shriveled little bellies were full. Sunlight and cold air came in through the ventilators. There were plenty of smokes from the Englishmen.
    The Americans arrived in Dresden at five in the afternoon. The boxcar doors were opened, and the doorways framed the loveliest city that most of the Americans had ever seen. The skyline was intricate and voluptuous and enchanted and absurd. It looked like a Sunday school picture of Heaven to Billy Pilgrim.
    Somebody behind him in the boxcar said, 'Oz.' That was I. That was me. The only other city I'd ever seen was Indianapolis, Indiana.

    Every other big city in Germany had been bombed and burned ferociously. Dresden had not suffered so much as a cracked windowpane. Sirens went off every day, screamed like hell, and people went down into cellars and listened to radios there. The planes were always bound for someplace else-Leipzig, Chemnitz, Plauen, places like that. So it goes.
    Steam radiators still whistled cheerily in Dresden. Street-cars clanged. Telephones rang and were answered. Lights went on and off when switches were clicked. There were theaters and restaurants. There was a zoo. The principal enterprises of the city were medicine and food-processing and the making of cigarettes.
    People were going home from work now in the late afternoon. They were tired.

    Eight Dresdeners crossed the steel spaghetti of the railroad yard. They were wearing new uniforms. They had been sworn into the army the day before. They were boys and men past middle age, and two veterans who had been shot to pieces in Russia. Their assignment was to guard one hundred American prisoners of war, who would work as contract labor. A grandfather and his grandson were in the squad. The grandfather was an architect.
    The eight were grim as they approached the boxcars containing their wards. They knew what sick and foolish soldiers they themselves appeared to be. One of them actually had an artificial leg, and carried not only a loaded rifle but a cane. Still they were expected to earn obedience and respect from tall cocky, murderous American infantrymen who had just come from all the killing of the front.
    And then they saw bearded Billy Pilgrim in his blue toga and silver shoes, with his hands in a muff. He looked at least sixty years old. Next to Billy was little Paul Lazzaro with a broken arm. He was fizzing with rabies. Next to Lazzaro was the poor old high school teacher, Edgar Derby, mournfully pregnant with patriotism and middle age and imaginary wisdom. And so on.
    The eight ridiculous Dresdeners ascertained that these hundred ridiculous creatures really were American fighting men fresh from the front. They smiled, and then they laughed. Their terror evaporated. There was nothing to be afraid of. Here were more crippled human beings, more fools like themselves. Here was light opera.

    So out of the gate of the railroad yard and into the streets of Dresden marched the light opera. Billy Pilgrim was the star. He led the parade. Thousands of people were on the sidewalks, going home from work. They were watery and putty-colored, having eaten mostly potatoes during the past two years. They had expected no blessings beyond the mildness of the day.  Suddenly-here was fun.
    Billy did not meet many of the eyes that found him so entertaining. He was enchanted by the architecture of the city. Merry amoretti wove garlands above windows. Roguish fauns and naked nymphs peeked down at Billy from festooned cornices. Stone monkeys frisked among scrolls and seashells and bamboo.
    Billy, with his memories of the future, knew that the city would be smashed to smithereens and then burned-in about thirty more days. He knew, too, that most of the people watching him would soon be dead. So it goes.
    And Billy worked his hands in his muff as he marched. His fingertips, working there in the hot darkness of the muff, wanted to know what the two lumps in the lining of the little impresario's coat were. The fingertips got inside the lining. They palpated the lumps, the pea-shaped thing and the horseshoe-shaped thing. The parade had to halt by a busy corner. The traffic light was red.

    There at the comer, in the front rank of pedestrians, was a surgeon who had been operating all day. He was a civilian, but his posture was military. He had served in two world wars. The sight of Billy offended him, especially after he learned from the guards that Billy was an American. It seemed to Wm that Billy was in abominable taste, supposed that Billy had gone to a lot of silly trouble to costume himself just so.
    The surgeon spoke English, and he said to Billy, 'I take it you find war a very comical thing.'
    Billy looked at him vaguely. Billy had lost track momentarily of where he was or how he had gotten there. He had no idea that people thought he was clowning. It was Fate, of course, which had costumed him-Fate, and a feeble will to survive.
    'Did you expect us to laugh?' the surgeon asked him.
    The surgeon was demanding some sort of satisfaction. Billy was mystified. Billy wanted to be friendly, to help, if he could, but his resources were meager. His fingers now held the two objects from the lining of the coat. Billy decided to show the surgeon what they were.
    'You thought we would enjoy being mocked?' the surgeon said. 'And do you feel proud to represent America as you do?' Billy withdrew a hand from his muff, held it under the surgeon's nose. On his palm rested a two-carat diamond and a partial denture.  The denture was an obscene little artifact-silver and pearl and tangerine.  Billy smiled.

    The parade pranced, staggered and reeled to the gate of the Dresden slaughterhouse, and then it went inside. The slaughterhouse wasn't a busy place any more. Almost all the hooved animals in Germany had been killed and eaten and excreted by human beings, mostly soldiers. So it goes.
    The Americans were taken to the fifth building inside the gate. It was a one-story cement-block cube with sliding doors in front and back. It had been built as a shelter for pigs about to be butchered. Now it was going to serve as a home away from home for one hundred American prisoners of war. There were bunks in there, and two potbellied stoves and a water tap. Behind it was a latrine, which was a one-rail fence with buckets under it.
    There was a big number over the door of the building. The number was five. Before the Americans could go inside, their only English-speaking guard told them to memorize their simple address, in case they got lost in the big city. Their address was this: 'Schlachthf-funf.' Schlachthf meant slaughterhouse.  Funf was good old five.

Seven

Billy Pilgrim got onto a chartered airplane in Ilium twenty-five years after that. He knew he was going to crash, but he didn't want to make a fool of himself by saying so. It was supposed to carry Billy and twenty-eight other optometrists to a convention in Montreal.
  His wife, Valencia, was outside, and his father-in-law, Lionel Merble, was strapped to the seat beside him.
    Lionel Merble was a machine. Tralfamadorians, of course, say that every creature and plant in the Universe is a machine. It amuses them that so many Earthlings are offended by the idea of being machines.
    Outside the plane, the machine named Valencia Merble Pilgrim was eating a Peter Paul Mound Bar and waving bye-bye.

    The plane took off without incident. The moment was structured that way. There was a barbershop quartet on board. They were optometrists, too. They called themselves 'The Febs,' which was an acronym for 'Four-eyed Bastards.'
    When the plane was safely aloft, the machine that was Bill's father-in-law asked the quartet to sing his favorite song. They knew what song he meant, and they sang it, and it went like this:

        In my prison cell I sit,
        With my britches full of shit,
        And my balls are bouncing gently on the floor.
        And I see the bloody snag
        When she bit me in the bag.
        Oh, I'll never fuck a Polack any more.

    Billy's father-in-law laughed and laughed at that, and he begged the quartet to sing the other Polish song he liked so much. So they sang a song from the Pennsylvania coal mines that began:

        Me, and Mike, ve vork in mine.
        Holy shit, ve have good time.
        Vunce a veek ve get our pay.
        Holy shit, no vork next day.

    Speaking of people from Poland: Billy- Pilgrim accidentally saw a Pole hanged in public, about three days after Billy got to Dresden. Billy just happened to be walking to work with some others shortly after sunrise, and they came to a gallows and a small crowd in front of a soccer stadium. The Pole was a farm laborer who was being hanged for having had sexual intercourse with a German woman. So it goes.

    Billy, knowing the plane was going to crash pretty soon, closed his eyes, traveled in time back to 1944. He was back in the forest in Luxembourg again-with the Three Musketeers. Roland Weary was shaking him, bonking his head against a tree. 'You guys go on without me,' said Billy Pilgrim.

    The barbershop quartet on the airplane was singing 'Wait Till the Sun Shines, Nelly,' when the plane smacked into the top of Sugarbush Mountain in Vermont. Everybody was killed but Billy and the copilot. So it goes.
    The people who first got to the crash scene were young Austrian ski instructors from the famous ski resort below. They spoke to each other in German as they went from body to body. They wore black wind masks with two holes for their eyes and a red topknot. They looked like golliwogs, like white people pretending to be black for the laughs they could get.
    Billy had a fractured skull, but he was still conscious. He didn't know where he was. His lips were working, and one of the golliwogs put his ear close to them to hear what might be his dying words.
    Billy thought the golliwog had something to do with the Second World War, and he whispered to him his address: 'Schlachthf-funf.'

    Billy was brought down Sugarbush Mountain on a toboggan. The golliwogs controlled it with ropes and yodeled melodiously for right-of-way. Near the bottom, the trail swooped around the pylons of a chair lift. Billy looked up at all the young people in bright elastic clothing and enormous boots and goggles, bombed out of their skulls with snow, swinging through the sky in yellow chairs. He supposed that they were part of an amazing new phase of the Second World War. It was all right with him. Everything was pretty much all right with Billy.
    He was taken to a small private hospital. A famous brain surgeon came up from Boston and operated on him for three hours. Billy was unconscious for two days after that, and he dreamed millions of things, some of them true. The true things were time-travel.
    One of the true things was his first evening in the slaughterhouse. He and poor old Edgar Derby were pushing an empty two-wheeled cart down a dirt lane between empty pens for animals. They were going to a communal kitchen for supper for all. They were guarded by a sixteen-year-old German named Werner Gluck. The axles of the cart were greased with the fat of dead animals. So it goes.
    The sun had just gone down, and its afterglow was backlighting the city, which formed low cliffs around the bucolic void to the idle stockyards. The city was blacked out because bombers might come, so Billy didn't get to see Dresden do one of the most cheerful things a city is capable of doing when the sun goes down, which is to wink its lights on one by one.
    There was a broad river to reflect those lights, which would have made their nighttime winkings very pretty indeed. It was the Elbe.

    Werner Gluck, the young guard, was a Dresden boy. He had never been in the slaughterhouse before, so he wasn't sure where the kitchen was. He was tall and weak like Billy, might have been a younger brother of his. They were, in fact, distant cousins, something they never found out. Gluck was armed with an incredibly heavy musket, a single-shot museum piece with an octagonal barrel and a smooth bore. He had fixed his bayonet. It was like a long knitting needle. It had no blood gutters.
    Gluck led the way to a building that he thought might contain the kitchen, and he opened the sliding doors in its side. There wasn't a kitchen in there, though. There was a dressing room adjacent to a communal shower, and there was a lot of steam. In the steam were about thirty teen-age girls with no clothes on. They were German refugees from Breslau, which had been tremendously bombed. They had just arrived in Dresden, too. Dresden was jammed with refugees.
    There those girls were with all their private parts bare, for anybody to see. And there in the doorway were Gluck and Derby and Pilgrim-the childish soldier and the poor old high school teacher and the clown in his toga and silver shoes-staring. The girls screamed. They covered themselves with their hands and turned their backs and so on, and made themselves utterly beautiful.
    Werner Gluck, who had never seen a naked woman before, closed the door. Bill had never seen one, either. It was nothing new to Derby.

    When the three fools found the communal kitchen, whose main job was to make lunch for workers in the slaughterhouse, everybody had gone home but one woman who had been waiting for them impatiently. She was a war widow. So it goes. She had her hat and coat on. She wanted to go home, too, even though there wasn't anybody there. Her white gloves were laid out side by side on the zinc counter top.
    She had two big cans of soup for the Americans. It was simmering over low fires on the gas range. She had stacks of loaves of black bread, too.
    She asked Gluck if he wasn't awfully young to be in the army. He admitted that he was.
    She asked Edgar Derby if he wasn't awfully old to be in the army. He said he was.
    She asked Billy Pilgrim what he was supposed to be. Billy said he didn't know. He was just trying to keep warm.
    'All the real soldiers are dead,' she said. It was true. So it goes.

    Another true thing that Billy saw while he was unconscious in Vermont was the work that he and the others had to do in Dresden during the month before the city was destroyed. They washed windows and swept floors and cleaned lavatories and put jars into boxes and sealed cardboard boxes in a factory that made malt syrup. The syrup was enriched with vitamins and minerals. The syrup was for pregnant women.
    The syrup tasted like thin honey laced with hickory smoke, and everybody who worked in the factory secretly spooned it all day long. They weren't pregnant, but they needed vitamins and minerals, too. Billy didn't spoon syrup on his first day at work, but lots of other Americans did.
    Billy spooned it on his second day. There were spoons hidden all over the factory, on rafters, in drawers, behind radiators, and so on. They had been hidden in haste by persons who had been spooning syrup, who had heard somebody else coming. Spooning was a crime.
    On his second day, Billy was cleaning behind a radiator and he found a spoon. To his back was a vat of syrup that was cooling. The only other person who could see Billy and his spoon was poor old Edgar Derby, who was washing a window outside. The spoon was a tablespoon. Billy thrust it into the vat, turned it around and around, making a gooey lollipop. He thrust it into his mouth.
    A moment went by, and then every cell in Billy's body shook him with ravenous gratitude and applause.

    There were diffident raps at the factory window. Derby was out there, having seen all. He wanted some syrup, too.
    So Billy made a lollipop for him. He opened the window. He stuck the lollipop into poor old Derby's gaping mouth. A moment passed, and then Derby burst into tears. Billy closed the window and hid the sticky spoon. Somebody was coming.

Eight

The Americans in the slaughterhouse had a very interesting visitor two days before Dresden was destroyed. He was Howard W. Campbell, Jr., an American who had become a Nazi. Campbell was the one who had written the monograph about the shabby behavior of American prisoners of war. He wasn't doing more research about prisoners now. He had come to the slaughter house to recruit men for a German military unit called 'The Free American Corps.' Campbell was the inventor and commander of the unit, which was supposed to fight only on the Russian front.

    Campbell was an ordinary looking man, but he was extravagantly costumed in a uniform of his own design. He wore a white ten-gallon hat and black cowboy boots decorated with swastikas and stars. He was sheathed in a blue body stocking which had yellow stripes running from his armpits to his ankles. His shoulder patch was a silhouette of Abraham Lincoln's profile on a field of pale green. He had a broad armband which was red, with a blue swastika in a circle of white.
    He was explaining this armband now in the cement-block hog barn.
    Billy Pilgrim had a boiling case of heartburn, since he had been spooning malt syrup all day long at work. The heartburn brought tears to his eves, so that his image of Campbell was distorted by jiggling lenses of salt water.
    'Blue is for the American sky,' Campbell was saying. 'White is for the race that pioneered the continent, drained the swamps and cleared the forests and built the roads and bridges. Red is for the blood of American patriots which was shed so gladly in years gone by.'

    Campbell's audience was sleepy. It had worked hard at the syrup factory, and then it had marched a long way home in the cold. It was skinny and hollow-eyed. Its skins were beginning to blossom with small sores. So were its mouths and throats and intestines. The malt syrup it spooned at the factory contained only a few of the vitamins and minerals every Earthling needs.
    Campbell offered the Americans food now, steaks and mashed potatoes and gravy and mince pie, if they would join the Free Corps. 'Once the Russians are defeated,' he went on, you will be repatriated through Switzerland.'
    There was no response.
    'You're going to have to fight the Communists sooner or later,' said Campbell. "Why not get it over with now?'

    And then it developed that Campbell was not going to go unanswered after all. Poor old Derby, the doomed high school teacher, lumbered to his feet for what was probably the finest moment in his life. 'Mere are almost no characters in this story, and almost no dramatic confrontations, because most of the people in it are so sick and so much the listless playthings of enormous forces. One of the main effects of war, after an, is that people are discouraged from being characters. But old Derby was a character now.
    His stance was that of a punch-drunk fighter. His head was down, his fists were out front, waiting for information and battle plan. Derby raised his head, called Campbell a snake. He corrected that. He said that snakes couldn't help being snakes, and that Campbell, who could help being what he was, was something much lower than a snake or a rat-or even a blood-filled tick.
    Campbell smiled.
    Derby spoke movingly of the American form of government, with freedom and justice and opportunities and fair play for all. He said there wasn't a man there who wouldn't gladly die for those ideals.
    He spoke of the brotherhood between the American and the Russian people, and how those two nations were going to crush the disease of Nazism, which wanted to infect the whole world.
    The air-raid sirens of Dresden howled mournfully.

    The Americans and their guards and Campbell took shelter in an echoing meat locker which was hollowed in living rock under the slaughterhouse. There was an iron staircase with iron doors at the top and bottom.
    Down in the locker were a few cattle and sheep and pigs, and horses hanging from iron hooks. So it goes. The locker had empty hooks for thousands more. It was naturally cool. There was no refrigeration. There was candlelight. The locker was whitewashed and smelled of carbolic acid. There were benches along a wall. The Americans went to these, brushing away flakes of whitewash before they sat down.
   Howard W. Campbell. Jr., remained standing, like the guards. He talked to the guards in excellent German. He had written many popular German plays and poems in his time, and had married a famous German actress named Resi North. She was dead now, had been killed while entertaining troops in the Crimea. So it goes.

    Nothing happened that night. It was the next night that about one hundred and thirty thousand people in Dresden would die. So it goes. Billy dozed in the meat locker. He found himself engaged again, word for word, gesture for gesture, in the argument with his daughter with which this tale begun.
    'Father,' she said, 'What are we going to do with you?'
    And so on. 'You know who I could just kill?' she asked.
    'Who could you kill?' said Billy.
    'That Kilgore Trout.'
    Kilgore Trout was and is a science-fiction writer, of course. Billy has not only read dozens of books by Trout-he has also become a friend of Trout, who is a bitter man.

    Trout lives in a rented basement in Ilium, about two miles from Billy's nice white home. He himself has no idea how many novels he has written-possibly seventy-five of the things. Not one of them has made money. So Trout keeps body and soul together as a circulation man for the Ilium Gazette, manages newspaper delivery boys, bullies and flatters and cheats little kids.
    Billy met him for the first time in 1964. Billy drove his Cadillac down a back alley in Ilium and he found his way blocked by dozens of boys and their bicycles. A meeting was in progress. The boys were harangued by a man in a full beard. He was cowardly and dangerous, and obviously very good at his job. Trout was sixty-two years old back then. He was telling the kids to get off their dead butts and get their daily customers to subscribe to the fucking Sunday edition, too. He said that whoever sold the most Sunday subscriptions during the next two months would get a free trip for himself and his parents to 's fucking Vineyard for a week, all expenses paid.
    And so on.
    One of the newspaper boys was actually a newspaper girl. She was electrified.

    Trout's paranoid face was terribly familiar to Billy, who had seen it on the jackets of so many books. But., coming upon that face suddenly in a home-town alley, Billy could not guess why the face was familiar. Billy thought maybe he had known this cracked messiah in Dresden somewhere. Trout certainly looked like a prisoner of war.
    And then the newspaper girl held up her hand. 'Mr. Trout,' she said, 'if I win, can I take my sister, too?'
    'Hell no,' said Kilgore Trout. 'You think money grows on trees?'

    Trout, incidentally, had written a book about a money tree. It had twenty-dollar bills for leaves. Its flowers were government bonds. Its fruit was diamonds. It attracted human beings who killed each other around the roots and made very good fertilizer.
    So it goes.

    Billy Pilgrim parked his Cadillac in the alley, and waited for the meeting to end. When the meeting broke up, there was still one boy Trout had to deal with. The boy wanted to quit because the work was so hard and the hours were so long and the pay was so small. Trout was concerned, because, if the boy really quit, Trout would have to deliver the boy's route himself, until he could find another sucker.
    'What are you?' Trout asked the boy scornfully. 'Some kind of gutless wonder?'
    This, too, was the title of a book by Trout, The Gutless Wonder. It was about a robot who had bad breath, who became popular after his halitosis was cured. But what made the story remarkable, since it was written in 1932, was that it predicted the widespread use of burning jellied gasoline on human beings.
    It was dropped on them from airplanes. Robots did the dropping. They had no conscience, and no circuits which would allow them to imagine what was happening to the people on the ground.
    Trout's leading robot looked like a human being, and could talk and dance and so on, and go out with girls. And nobody held it against him that he dropped jellied gasoline on people. But they found his halitosis unforgivable. But then he cleared that up, and he was welcomed to the human race.

    Trout lost his argument with the boy who wanted to quit. He told the boy about all the millionaires who had carried newspapers as boys, and the boy replied: 'Yeah-but I bet they quit after a week, it's such a royal screwing.'
    And the boy left his full newspaper bag at Trout's feet, with the customer book on top. It was up to Trout to deliver these papers. He didn't have a car. He didn't even have a bicycle, and he was scared to death of dogs.
    Somewhere a big dog barked.
    As Trout lugubriously slung the bag from his shoulder, Billy Pilgrim approached him.
    'Mr. Trout-'
    'Yes?'
    "Are-are you Kilgore Trout?
    'Yes.' Trout supposed that Billy had some complaint about the way his newspapers were being delivered. He did not think of himself as a writer for the simple reason that the world had never allowed him to think of himself in this way.
    'The-the writer?' said Billy.
    'The what?'
    Billy was certain that he had made a mistake. 'There's a writer named Kilgore Trout.'
    'There is?' Trout looked foolish and dazed.
    'You never heard of him?'
    Trout shook his head. 'Nobody-nobody ever did.'

    Billy helped Trout deliver his papers, driving him from house to house in the Cadillac. Billy was the responsible one, finding the houses, checking them off. Trout's mind was blown. He had never met a fan before, and Billy was such an avid fan.
    Trout told him that he had never seen a book of his advertised, reviewed, or on sale. 'All these years' he said, 'I've been opening the window and making love to the world.'
    'You must surely have gotten letters,' said Billy. 'I've felt like writing you letters many times.'
    Trout held up a single finger. 'One.'
    'Was it enthusiastic?'
    'It was insane. The writer said I should be President of the World.'
    It turned out that the person who had written this letter was Elliot Rosewater, Billy's friend in the veterans' hospital near Lake Placid. Billy told Trout about Rosewater.
    'My God-I thought he was about fourteen years old,' said Trout.
    "A full grown man-a captain in the war.'
    'The writes like a fourteen-year-old,' said Kilgore Trout.

    Billy invited Trout to his eighteenth wedding anniversary which was only two days hence. Now the party was in progress.
    Trout was in Billy's dining room, gobbling canaps. He was talking with a mouthful of Philadelphia cream cheese and salmon roe to an optometrist's wife. Everybody at the party was associated with optometry in some way, except Trout. And he alone was without glasses. He was making a great hit. Everybody was ed to have a real author at the party, even though they had never read his books.
    Trout was talking to a Maggie White, who had given up being a dental assistant to become a homemaker for an optometrist. She was very pretty. The last book she had read was Ivanhoe.
    Billy Pilgrim stood nearby, listening. He was palpating something in his pocket. It was a present he was about to give his Wife, a white satin box containing a star sapphire cocktail ring. The ring was worth eight hundred dollars.

    The adulation that Trout was receiving, mindless and illiterate as it was, affected Trout like marijuana. He was happy and loud and impudent.
    'I'm afraid I don't read as much as I ought to,' said Maggie.
    'We're all afraid of something,' Trout replied. 'I'm afraid of cancer and rats and Doberman pinschers.'
    'I should know, but I don't, so I have to ask,' said Maggie, 'what's the most famous thing you ever wrote?'
    'It was about a funeral for a great French chef.'
    'That sounds interesting.'
    'All the great chefs in the world are there. It's a beautiful ceremony.' Trout was making this up as he went along. 'Just before the casket is closed, the mourners sprinkle parsley and paprika on the deceased.' So it goes.

    'Did that really happen?' said Maggie White. She was a dull person, but a sensational invitation to make babies. Men looked at her and wanted to fill her up with babies right away. She hadn't had even one baby yet. She used birth control.
    'Of course it happened,' Trout told her. 'If I wrote something that hadn't really happened, and I tried to sell it, I could go to jail. That's fraud!'
    Maggie believed him. 'I'd never thought about that before.'
    'Think about it now.'
    'It's like advertising. You have to tell the truth in advertising, or you get in trouble.'
    'Exactly. The same body of laws applies.'
    'Do you think you might put us in a book sometime?'
    'I put everything that happens to me in books.'
    'I guess I better be careful what I say.'
    'That's right. And I'm not the only one who's listening. God is listening, too. And on Judgment Day he's going to tell you all the things you said and did. If it turns out they're bad things instead of good things, that's too bad for you, because you'll bum forever and ever. The burning never stops hurting.'
    Poor Maggie turned gray. She believed that too, and was petrified.
    Kilgore Trout laughed uproariously. A salmon egg flew out of his mouth and landed in Maggie's cleavage.

    Now an optometrist called for attention. He proposed a toast to Billy and Valencia, whose anniversary it was. According to plan, the barbershop quartet of optometrists, 'The Febs,' sang while people drank and Billy and Valencia put their arms around each other, just glowed. Everybody's eyes were shining. The song was 'That Old Gang of Mine.'
    Gee, that song went, but I'd give the world to see that old gang of mine. And so on. A little later it said. So long forever, old fellows and gals, so long forever old sweethearts and pals-God bless 'em-And so on.
    Unexpectedly, Billy Pilgrim found himself upset by the song and the occasion. He had never had an old gang, old sweethearts and pals, but he missed one anyway, as the quartet made slow, agonized experiments with chords-chords intentionally sour, sourer still, unbearably sour, and then a chord that was suffocatingly sweet, and then some sour ones again. Billy had powerful psychosomatic responses to the changing chords. His mouth filled with the taste of lemonade, and his face became grotesque, as though he really were being stretched on the torture engine called the rack.

    He looked so peculiar that several people commented on it solicitously when the song was done. They thought he might have been having a heart attack, and Billy seemed to confirm this by going to a chair and sitting down haggardly.
    There was silence.
    'Oh my God,' said Valencia, leaning over him, 'Billy-are you all right?'
    'Yes.'
    'You look so awful.'
    'Really-I'm O.K.' And he was, too, except that he could find no explanation for why the song had affected him so grotesquely. He had supposed for years that he had no secrets from himself. Here was proof that he had a great big secret somewhere inside, and he could not imagine what it was.

    People drifted away now, seeing the color return to Billy's cheeks, seeing him smile. Valencia stayed with him, and Kilgore Trout, who had been on the fringe of the crowd, came closer, interested, shrewd.
    'You looked as though you'd seen a ghost,' said Valencia.
    'No,' said Billy. He hadn't seen anything but what was really before him-the faces of the four singers, those four ordinary men, cow-eyed and mindless and anguished as they went from sweetness to sourness to sweetness again.
    'Can I make a guess?' said Kilgore Trout 'You saw through a time window.'
    'A what?' said Valencia.
    'He suddenly saw the past or the future. Am I right?'
    'No,' said Billy Pilgrim. He got up, put a hand into his pocket, found the box containing the ring in there. He took out the box, gave it absently to Valencia. He had meant to give it to her at the end of the song, while everybody was watching. Only Kilgore Trout was there to see.
    'For me?' said Valencia.
    'Yes'
    "Oh my God, she said. Then she said it louder, so other people heard. They gathered around, and she opened it, and she almost screamed when she saw the sapphire with a star in it. 'Oh my God,' she said. She gave Billy a big kiss. She said, 'Thank you, thank you, thank you.'

    There was a lot of talk about what wonderful jewelry Billy had given to Valencia over the years. 'My God,' said Maggie White, 'she's already got the biggest diamond I ever saw outside of a movie.' She was talking about the diamond Billy had brought back from the war.
    The partial denture he had found inside his little impresario's coat, incidentally, was in his cufflinks box in his dresser drawer. Billy had a wonderful collection of cufflinks. It was the custom of the family to give him cufflinks on every Father's Day. He was wearing Father's Day cufflinks now. They had cost over one hundred dollars. They were made out of ancient Roman coins. He had one pair of cufflinks upstairs which were little roulette wheels that really worked. He had another pair which had a real thermometer in one and a real compass in the other.

    Billy now moved about the party-outwardly normal. Kilgore Trout was shadowing him, keen to know what Billy had suspected or seen. Most of Trout's novels, after all, dealt with time warps and extrasensory perception and other unexpected things. Trout believed in things like that, was greedy to have their existence proved.
    'You ever put a full-length mirror on the floor, and then have a dog stand on it?' Trout asked Billy.
    'No.'
    'The dog will look down, and all of a sudden he'll realize there's nothing under him. He thinks he's standing on thin air. He'll jump a mile.'
    'He will?'
    That's how you looked-as though you all of a sudden realized you were standing on thin air.'

    The barbershop quartet sang again. Billy was emotionally racked again. The experience was definitely associated with those four men and not what they sang.
    Here is what they sang, while Billy was pulled apart inside:
        'Leven cent cotton, forty cent meat,
        How in the world can a poor man eat?
        Pray for the sunshine, 'cause it will rain.
        Things gettin' worse, drivin' all insane;
        Built a nice bar, painted it brown
        Lightnin' came along and burnt it down:
        No use talkin' any man's beat,
        With 'leven cent cotton and forty cent meat.
        'Leven cent cotton, a car-load of tax,
        The load's too heavy for our poor backs
    And so on.
    Billy fled upstairs in his nice white home.

    Trout would have come upstairs with him if Billy hadn't told him not to. Then Billy went into the upstairs bathroom, which was dark He closed and locked the door. He left it dark, and gradually became aware that he was not alone. His son was in there.
    'Dad?' his son said in the dark. Robert, the future Green Beret, was seventeen then. Billy liked him, but didn't know him very well. Billy couldn't help suspecting that there wasn't much to know about Robert.
    Billy flicked on the light. Robert was sitting on the toilet with his pajama bottoms around his ankles. He was wearing an electric guitar, slung around his neck on a strap. He had just bought the guitar that day. He couldn't play it yet and, in fact, never learned to play it. It was a nacreous pink.
    'Hello, son,' said Billy Pilgrim.

    Billy went into his bedroom, even though there were guests to be entertained downstairs. He lay down on his bed, turned on the Magic Fingers. The mattress trembled, drove a dog out from under the bed. The dog was Spot. Good old Spot was still alive in those days. Spot lay down again in a corner.

    Billy thought hard about the effect the quartet had had on him, and then found an association with an experience he had had long ago. He did not travel in time to the experience. He remembered it shimmeringly-as follows:
    He was down in the meat locker on the night that Dresden was destroyed. There were sounds like giant footsteps above. Those were sticks of high-explosive bombs. The giants walked and walked. The meat locker was a very safe shelter. All that happened down there was an occasional shower of calcimine. The Americans and four of their guards and a few dressed carcasses were down there, and nobody else. The rest of the guards had, before the raid began, gone to the comforts of their own homes in Dresden. They were all being killed with their families.
    So it goes.
    The girls that Billy had seen naked were all being killed, too, in a much shallower shelter in another part of the stockyards.
    So it goes.
    A guard would go to the head of the stairs every so often to see what it was like outside, then he would come down and whisper to the other guards. There was a fire-storm out there. Dresden was one big flame. The one flame ate everything organic, everything that would burn.
    It wasn't safe to come out of the shelter until noon the next day. When the Americans and their guards did come out, the sky was black with smoke. The sun was an angry little pinhead. Dresden was like the moon now nothing but minerals. The stones were hot. Everybody else in the neighborhood was dead.
    So it goes.

    The guards drew together instinctively, rolled their eyes. They experimented with one expression and then another, said nothing, though their mouths were often open. They looked like a silent film of a barbershop quartet.
    'So long forever,' they might have been singing, 'old fellows and pals; So long forever, old sweethearts and pals-God bless 'em-'

    'Tell me a story,' Montana Wildhack said to Billy Pilgrim in the Tralfamadorian zoo one time. They were in bed side by side. They had privacy. The canopy covered the dome. Montana was six months pregnant now, big and rosy, lazily demanding small favors from Billy from time to time. She couldn't send Billy out for ice cream or strawberries, since the atmosphere outside the dome was cyanide, and the nearest strawberries and ice cream were millions of light years away.
    She could send him to the refrigerator, which was decorated with the blank couple on the bicycle built for two-or, as now she could wheedle, 'Tell me a story, Billy boy.'
    'Dresden was destroyed on the night of February 13, 1945,' Billy Pilgrim began. 'We came out of our shelter the next day.' He told Montana about the four guards who, in their astonishment and grief, resembled a barber-shop quartet. He told her about the stockyards with all the fenceposts gone, with roofs and windows gone-told her about seeing little logs lying around. These were people who had been caught in the firestorm. So it goes.
    Billy told her what had happened to the buildings that used to form cliffs around the stockyards. They had collapsed. Their wood had been consumed, and their stones had crashed down, had tumbled against one another until they locked at last in low and graceful curves.
    'It was like the moon,' said Billy Pilgrim.

    The guards told the Americans to form in ranks of four, which they did. Then they had them march back to the hog barn which had, been their home. Its wars still stood, but its windows and roof were gone, and there was nothing inside but ashes and dollops of melted glass. It was realized then that there was no food or water, and that the survivors, if they were going to continue to survive, were going to have to climb over curve after curve on the face of the moon.
    Which they did.

    The curves were smooth only when seen from a distance. The people climbing them learned that they were treacherous, jagged things-hot to the touch, often unstable eager, should certain important rocks be disturbed, to tumble some more, to form lower, more solid curves.
    Nobody talked much as the expedition crossed the moon. There was nothing appropriate to say. One thing was clear: Absolutely everybody in the city was supposed to be dead, regardless of what they were, and that anybody that moved in it represented a flaw in the design. There were to be no moon men at all.

    American fighter planes came in under the smoke to see if anything was moving. They saw Billy and the rest moving down there. The planes sprayed them with machine-gun bullets, but the bullets missed. Then they saw some other people moving down by the riverside and they shot at them. They hit some of them. So it goes.
    The idea was to hasten the end of the war.

    Billy's story ended very curiously in a suburb untouched by fire and explosions. The guards and the Americans came at nightfall to an inn which was open for business. There was candlelight. There were fires in three fireplaces downstairs. There were empty tables and chairs waiting for anyone who might come, and empty beds with covers turned down upstairs.
    There was a blind innkeeper and his sighted wife, who was the cook, and their two young daughters, who worked as waitresses and maids. This family knew that Dresden was gone. Those with eyes had seen it bum and bum, understood that they were on the edge of a desert now. Still-they had opened for business, had polished the glasses and wound the clocks and stirred the fires, and waited and waited to see who would come.
    There was no great flow of refugees from Dresden. The clocks ticked on, the crackled, the translucent candles dripped. And then there was a knock on the door, and in came four guards and one hundred American prisoners of war.
    The innkeeper asked the guards if they had come from the city.
    'Yes.'
    Are there more people coming?'
    And the guards said that, on the difficult route they had chosen, they had not seen another living soul.

    The blind innkeeper said that the Americans could sleep in his stable that night, and he gave them soup and ersatz coffee and a little beer. Then he came out to the stable to listen to them bedding down in the straw.
    'Good night, Americans,' he said in German. 'Sleep well.'

Nine

Here is how Billy Pilgrim lost his wife, Valencia.
    He was unconscious in the hospital in Vermont, after the airplane crash on Sugarbush Mountain, and Valencia, having heard about the crash, was driving from Ilium to the hospital in the family Cadillac El Dorado Coupe de Ville. Valencia was hysterical, because she had been told frankly that Billy might die, or that, if he lived, he might be a vegetable.
    Valencia adored Billy. She was crying and yelping so hard as she drove that she missed the correct turnoff from the throughway. She applied her power brakes, and a Mercedes slammed into her from behind. Nobody was hurt, thank God, because both drivers were wearing seat belts. Thank God, thank God. The Mercedes lost only a headlight. But the rear end of the Cadillac was a body-and-fender man's wet dream. The trunk and fenders were collapsed. The gaping trunk looked like the mouth of a village idiot who 'was explaining that he didn't know anything about anything. The fenders shrugged. The bumper was at a high port arms. 'Reagan for President!' a sticker on the bumper said. The back window was veined with cracks. The exhaust system rested on the pavement.
    The driver of the Mercedes got out and went to Valencia, to find out if she was all right. She blabbed hysterically about Billy and the airplane crash, and then she put her car in gear and crossed the median divider, leaving her exhaust system behind.
    When she arrived at the hospital, people rushed to the windows to see what all the noise was. The Cadillac, with both mufflers gone, sounded like a heavy bomber coming in on a wing and a prayer. Valencia turned off the engine, but then she slumped against the steering wheel, and the horn brayed steadily. A doctor and a nurse ran out to find out what the trouble was. Poor Valencia was unconscious, overcome by carbon monoxide. She was a heavenly azure.
    One hour later she was dead. So it goes.

    Billy knew nothing about it. He, dreamed on, and traveled in time and so forth. The hospital was so crowded that Billy couldn't have a room to himself. He shared a room with a Harvard history professor named Bertram Copeland Rumfoord. Rumfoord didn't have to look at Billy, because Billy was surrounded by white linen screens on rubber wheels. But Rumfoord could hear Billy talking to himself from time to time.
    Rumfoord's left leg was in traction. He had broken it while skiing. He was seventy years old, but had the body and spirit of a man half that age. He had been honeymooning with his fifth wife when he broke his leg. Her name was Lily. Lily was twenty-three.

    Just about the time poor Valencia was pronounced dead, Lily came into Billy's and Rumfoord's room with an armload of books. Rumfoord had sent her down to Boston to get them. He was working on a one-volume history of the United States Army Air Corps in the Second World War. The books were about bombings and sky battles that had happened before Lily was even born.

    'You guys go on without me,' said Billy Pilgrim deliriously, as pretty little Lily came in. She had been an a-go-go girl when Rumfoord saw her and resolved to make her his own. She was a high school dropout. Her I.Q. was 103. 'He scares me,' she whispered to her husband about Billy Pilgrim.
    'He bores the hell out of me!' Rumfoord replied boomingly. 'All he does in his sleep is quit and surrender and apologize and ask to be left alone.' Rumfoord was a retired brigadier general in the Air Force Reserve, the official Air Force Historian, a fun professor, the author of twenty-six books, a multimillionaire since birth, and one of the great competitive sailors of all time. His most popular book was about sex and strenuous athletics for men over sixty-five. Now he quoted Theodore Roosevelt whom he resembled a lot:
    "'I could carve a better man out of a banana."'

    One of the things Rumfoord had told Lily to get in Boston was a copy of President Harry S. Truman's announcement to the world that an atomic bomb had been dropped on Hiroshima. She had a Xerox of it, and Rumfoord asked her if she had read it.
    'No.' She didn't read well, which was one of the reasons she had dropped out of high school.
    Rumfoord ordered her to sit down and read the Truman statement now. He didn't know that she couldn't read much. He knew very little about her, except that she was one more public demonstration that he was a superman.
    So Lily sat down and pretended to read the Truman thing, which went like this:
    Sixteen hours ago an American airplane dropped one bomb on Hiroshima, an important Japanese Army base. That bomb had more power than 20,000 tons of T.N.T. It had more than two thousand times the blast power of the British 'Grand Slam' which is the largest bomb ever yet used in the history of warfare.
    The Japanese began the war from the air at Pearl Harbor. They have been repaid many-fold. And the end is not yet. With this bomb we have now added a new and revolutionary increase in destruction to supplement the growing power of our armed forces. In their present form these bombs are now in production, and even more powerful forms are in development.
    It is an atomic bomb. It is a harnessing of the basic power of the universe. The force from which the sun draws its power has been loosed against those who brought war to the Far East.
    Before 1939, it was the accepted belief of scientists that it was theoretically possible to release atomic energy. But nobody knew any practical method of doing it. By 1942, however, we knew that the Germans were working feverishly to find a way to add atomic energy to all the other engines of war with which they hoped to enslave the world. But they failed. We may be grateful to Providence that the Germans got the V-1's and V-2's late and in limited quantities and even more grateful that they did not get the atomic bomb at all.
    The battle of the laboratories held-fateful risks for us as well as the battles of the air, land and sea, and we have now won the battle of the laboratories as we have won the other battles.
    We are now prepared to obliterate more rapidly and completely every productive enterprise the Japanese have above ground in any city, said Harry Truman. We shall destroy their docks, their factories and their communications. Let there be no mistake; we shall completely destroy Japan's power to make war. It was to spare-
    And so on.

    One of the books that Lily had brought Rumfoord was The Destruction of Dresden by an Englishman named David Irving. It was an American edition, published by Holt., Rinehart and Winston in 1964. What Rumfoord wanted from it were. portions of the forewords by his friends Ira C. Eaker, Lieutenant General, U.S.A.F., retired, and British Air Marshal Sir Robert Saundby, K.C.B., K.B.E., M.C., D.F.C., A.F.C.
    I find it difficult to understand Englishmen or Americans .who weep about enemy civilians who were killed but who have not shed a tear for our gallant crews lost in combat with a cruel enemy, wrote his friend General Eaker in part. I think it would have been well for Mr. Irving to have remembered, when he was drawing the frightful picture of the civilian killed at Dresden, that V-1's and V-2's were at that very time failing on England, killing civilian men, women and children indiscriminately, as they were designed and launched to do. It might be well to remember Buchenwald and Coventry, too
    Eaker's foreword ended this way
    I deeply regret that British and U.S. bombers killed 135,000 people in the attack on Dresden, but I remember who started the last war and I regret even more the -loss of more than 5,000,000, Allied lives in the necessary effort to completely defeat and utterly destroy nazism.
    So it goes.
    What Air Marshal Saundby said, among other things, was this
    That the bombing of Dresden was a great tragedy none can deny. That it was really a military necessity few, after reading this book, will believe. It was one of those terrible things that sometimes happen in wartime, brought about by an unfortunate combination of circumstances. Those who approved it were neither wicked no?, cruel, though it may well be that they were too remote from the harsh realities of war to understand fully the appalling destructive power of air bombardment in the spring of 1945
    The advocates of nuclear disarmament seem to believe that, if they could achieve their aim., war would become tolerable and decent. They would do well to read this book and ponder the fate of Dresden, where 135,000 people died as the result of an at attack with conventional weapons. On the night of March 9th, 1945, an air attack on Tokyo by American heavy bombers, using incendiary and high explosive bombs, caused the death of 83,793 people. The atom bomb dropped on Hiroshima killed 71,379 people.
    So it goes.
    'If you're ever in Cody, Wyoming,' said Billy Pilgrim behind his white linen screens, 'just ask for Wild Bob.'
    Lily Rumfoord shuddered, went on pretending to read the Harry Truman thing.
    Billy's daughter Barbara came in later that day. She was all doped up, had the same glassy-eyed look that poor old Edgar Derby wore just before he was shot in Dresden. Doctors had given her pills so she could continue to function, even though her father was broken and her mother was dead.
    So it goes.
    She was accompanied by a doctor and a nurse. Her brother Robert was flying home from a battlefield in Vietnam. 'Daddy,' she said tentatively. 'Daddy? '
    But Billy was ten years away, back in 1958. He was examining the eyes of a young male Mongolian idiot in order to prescribe corrective lenses. The idiot's mother was there, acting as an interpreter.
    'How many dots do you see?' Billy Pilgrim asked him.

    And then Billy traveled in time to when he was sixteen years old, in the waiting room of a doctor. Billy had an infected thumb. There was only one other patient waiting-an old, old man. The old man was in agony because of gas. He farted tremendously, and then he belched.
    'Excuse me,' he said to Billy. Then he did it again. 'Oh God he said, 'I knew it was going to be bad getting old.' He shook his head. 'I didn't know it was going to be this bad.'

    Billy Pilgrim opened his eyes in the hospital in Vermont, did not know where he was. Watching him was his son Robert. Robert was wearing the uniform of the famous Green Berets. Robert's hair was short, was wheat-colored bristles. Robert was clean and neat. He was decorated with a Purple Heart and a Silver Star and a Bronze Star with two clusters.
    This was a boy who had flunked out of high school, who had been an alcoholic at sixteen, who had run with a rotten bunch of kids, who had been arrested for tipping over hundreds of tombstones in a Catholic cemetery one time. He was all straightened out now. His posture was wonderful and his shoes were shined and his trousers were pressed, and he was a leader of men.
    'Dad?'
    Billy Pilgrim closed his eyes again.

    Billy had to miss his wife's funeral because he was still so sick. He was conscious, though, while Valencia was being put into the ground in Ilium. Billy hadn't said much since regaining consciousness, hadn't responded very elaborately to the news of Valencia's death and Robert's coming home from the war and so on-so it was generally believed that he was a vegetable. There was talk of performing an operation on him later, one which might improve the circulation of blood to his brain.
    Actually, Billy's outward listlessness was a screen. The listlessness concealed a mind which was fizzing and flashing thrillingly. It was preparing letters and lectures about the flying saucers, the negligibility of death and the true nature of time.

    Professor Rumfoord said frightful things about Billy within Billy's hearing, confident that Billy no longer had any brain at all. 'Why don't they let him die?' he asked Lily.
    'I don't know, she said.
    'That's not a human being anymore. Doctors are for human beings. They should turn him over to a veterinarian or a tree surgeon. They'd know what to do. Look at him! That's life, according to the medical profession. Isn't life wonderful?'
    'I don't know,' said Lily.

    Rumfoord talked to Lily about the bombing of Dresden one time, and Billy heard it all. Rumfoord had a problem about Dresden. His one-volume history of the Army Air Force in the Second World War was supposed to be a readable condensation of the twenty-seven-volume Official History of the Army Air Force in World War Two. The thing was, though, there was almost nothing in the twenty-seven volumes about the Dresden raid, even though it had been such a howling success. The extent of the success had been kept a secret for many years after the war-a secret from the American people. It was no secret from the Germans, of course, or from the Russians, who occupied Dresden after the war, who are in Dresden still.

    'Americans have finally heard about Dresden.,' said Rumfoord, twenty-three years after the raid. 'A lot of them know now how much worse it was than Hiroshima. So I've got to put something about it in my book. From the official Air Force standpoint., it'll all be new.'
    'Why would they keep it a secret so long?' said Lily.
    'For fear that a lot of bleeding hearts' said Rumfoord, 'might not think it was such a wonderful thing to do.'
    It was now that Billy Pilgrim spoke up intelligently. 'I was there' he said.
    It was difficult for Rumfoord to take Billy seriously, since Rumfoord, had so long considered Billy a repulsive non-person who would be much better off dead. Now, with Billy speaking clearly and to the point, Rumfoord's ears wanted to treat the words as a foreign language that was not worth learning. did he say?' said Rumfoord.
    Lily had to serve as an 'interpreter. 'He said he was there.' she explained.
    'He was where?
    'I don't know,' said Lily. 'Where were you?' she asked Billy.
    'Dresden' said Billy.
    'Dresden,' Lily told Rumfoord.
    'He's simply echoing things we say,' said Rumfoord.
    'Oh, ' said Lily.
    'He's got echolalia now.'
    'Oh.'

    Echolalia is a mental disease which makes people immediately repeat things that well people around them say. But Billy didn't really have it. Rumfoord simply insisted, for his own comfort, that Billy had it. Rumfoord was thinking in a military manner: that an inconvenient person, one whose death he wished for very much, for practical reasons, was suffering from a repulsive disease.

    Rumfoord went on insisting for several hours that Billy had echolalia-told nurses and a doctor that Billy had echolalia now. Some experiments were performed on Billy. Doctors and nurses tried to get Billy to echo something, but Billy wouldn't make a sound for them.
    'He isn't doing it now,' said Rumfoord peevishly. 'The minute you go away, he'll start doing it again.'
    Nobody took Rumfoord's diagnosis seriously. The staff thought Rumfoord was a hateful old man, conceited and cruel. He often said to them, in one way or another, that people who were weak deserved to die. Whereas the staff, of course, was devoted to the idea that weak people should be helped as much as possible, that nobody should die.

    There in the hospital, Billy was having an adventure very common among people without power in time of war: He was trying to prove to a wilfully deaf and blind enemy that he was interesting to hear and see. He kept silent until the lights went' out at night, and then, when there had been a long silence containing nothing to echo, he said to Rumfoord, 'I was in Dresden when it was bombed. I was a prisoner of war.' Rumfoord sighed impatiently.
    'Word of honor.,' said Billy Pilgrim. 'Do you believe me?'
    'Must we talk about it now?' said Rumfoord. He had heard. He didn't believe.
    'We don't ever have to talk about it,' said Billy. 'I just want you to know: I was there.'

    Nothing more was said about Dresden that night, and Billy closed his eyes, traveled in time to a May afternoon, two days after the end of the Second World War in Europe. Billy and five other American prisoners were riding in a coffin-shaped green wagon, which they had found abandoned complete with two horses, in a suburb of Dresden. Now they were being drawn by the clop-clop-clopping horses down narrow lanes which had been cleared through the moonlike ruins. They were going back to the slaughterhouse for souvenirs of the war. Billy was reminded of the sounds of milkmen's horses early in the morning in Ilium, when he was a boy.
    Billy sat in the back of the jiggling coffin. His head was tilted back and his nostrils were flaring. He was happy. He was warm. There was food in the wagon, and wine-and a camera, and a stamp collection, and a stuffed owl, and a mantel clock that ran on changes of barometric pressure. The Americans had gone into empty houses in the suburb where they had been imprisoned, and they had taken these and many other things.
    The owners, hearing that the Russians were coming, killing and robbing and raping and burning, had fled.
    But the Russians hadn't come yet, even two days after the war. It was peaceful in the ruins. Billy saw only one other person on the way to the slaughterhouse. It was an old man pushing a baby buggy. In the buggy were pots and cups and an umbrella frame, and other things he had found.

    Billy stayed in the wagon when it reached the slaughterhouse, sunning himself. The others went looking for souvenirs. Later on in life, the Tralfamadorians would advise Billy to concentrate on the happy moments of his life, and to ignore the unhappy ones-to stare only at pretty things as eternity failed to go by. If this sort of selectivity had been possible for Billy, he might have chosen as his happiest moment his sun-drenched snooze in the back of the wagon.

    Billy Pilgrim was armed as he snoozed. It was the first time he had been armed since basic training. His companions had insisted that he arm himself, since God only knew what sorts of killers might be in burrows on the face of the moon-wild dogs, packs of rats fattened on corpses, escaped maniacs and murderers, soldiers who would never quit killing until they themselves were killed.
    Billy had a tremendous cavalry pistol in his belt. It was a relic of the First World War. It had a ring in its butt. It was loaded with bullets the size of robins' eggs. Billy had found it in the bedside table in a house. That was one of the things about the end of the war: Absolutely anybody who wanted a weapon could have one. They were lying all around. Billy had a saber, too. It was a Luftwaffe ceremonial saber. Its hilt was stamped with a screaming eagle. The eagle was carrying a swastika and looking down. Billy found it stuck into a telephone pole. He had pulled it out of the pole as the wagon went by.

    Now his snoozing became shallower as be heard a man and a woman speaking German in pitying tones. The speakers were commiserating with somebody lyrically. Before Billy opened his eyes, it seemed to him that the tones might have been those used by the friends of Jesus when they took His ruined body down from His cross. So it goes.
    Billy opened his eyes. A middle-aged man and wife were crooning to the horses. They were noticing what the Americans had not noticed-that the horses' mouths were bleeding, gashed by the bits, that the horses' hooves were broken, so that every step meant agony, that the horses were insane with thirst. The Americans had treated their form of transportation as though it were no more sensitive than a six-cylinder Chevrolet.

    These two horse pitiers moved back along the wagon to where they could gaze in patronizing reproach at Billy-at Billy Pilgrim, who was so long and weak, so ridiculous in his azure toga and silver shoes. They weren't afraid of him. They weren't afraid of anything. They were doctors, both obstetricians. They had been delivering babies until the hospitals were all burned down. Now they were picnicking near where their apartment used to be.
    The woman was softly beautiful, translucent from having eaten potatoes for so long. The man wore a business suit, necktie and all. Potatoes had made him gaunt. He was as tall as Billy, wore steel-rimmed tri-focals. This couple, so involved with babies, had never reproduced themselves, though they could have. This was an interesting comment on the whole idea of reproduction.
    They had nine languages between them. They tried Polish on Billy Pilgrim first, since he was dressed so clownishly, since the wretched Poles were the involuntary clowns of the Second World War.
    Billy asked them in English what it was they wanted, and they at once scolded him in English for the condition of the horses. They made Billy get out of the wagon and come look at the horses. When Billy saw the condition of his means of transportation, he burst into tears. He hadn't cried about anything else in the war.

    Later on, as a middle-aged optometrist, he would weep quietly and privately sometimes, but never make loud boo-hoo-ing noises.
    Which is why the epigraph of this book is the quatrain from the famous Christmas carol. Billy cried very little, though he often saw things worth crying about, and in that respect, at least, he resembled the Christ of the Carol:
        The cattle are lowing,
        The Baby awakes.
        But the little Lord Jesus
        No crying He makes.
    Billy traveled in time back to the hospital in Vermont. Breakfast had been eaten and cleared away and Professor Rumfoord was reluctantly becoming interested in Billy as a human being. Rumfoord questioned Billy gruffly, satisfied himself that Billy really had been in Dresden. He asked Billy what it had been like, and Billy told him about the horses and the couple picnicking on the moon.
    The story ended this way,. Billy and the doctors unharnessed the horses, but the horses wouldn't go anywhere. Their feet hurt too much. And then Russians came on motorcycles, and they arrested everybody but the horses.
    Two days after that, Billy was turned over to the Americans, who shipped him home on a very slow freighter called the Lucretia A. Mott. Lucretia A. Mott was a famous American suffragette. She was dead. So it goes.

    'It had to be done,' Rumfoord told Billy, speaking of the destruction of Dresden.
    'I know,' said Billy.
    'That's war.'
    'I know. I'm not complaining.'
    'It must have been hell on the ground.'
    'It was,' said Billy Pilgrim.
    Pity the men who had to do it.'
    "I do.'
    'You must have had mixed feelings, there on the ground.'
    "It was all right.,' said Billy. 'Everything is all right, and everybody has to do exactly what he does. -I learned that on Tralfamadore.'

    Billy Pilgrim's daughter took him home later that day, put him to bed in his house, turned the Magic Fingers on. There was a practical nurse there. Billy wasn't supposed to work or even leave the house for a while, at least. He was under observation.
    But Billy sneaked out while the nurse wasn't watching and he drove to New York City, where he hoped to appear on television. He was going to tell the world about the lessons of Tralfamadore.

    Billy Pilgrim checked into the Royalton Hotel on Forty-fourth Street in New York. He by chance was given a room which had once been the home of George Jean Nathan, the critic and editor. Nathan, according to the Earthling concept of time, had died back in 1958. According to the Tralfamadorian concept, of course. Nathan was still alive somewhere and always would be.
    The room was small and simple, except that it was on the top floor, and had French doors which opened onto a terrace as large as the room. And beyond the parapet of the terrace was the air space over Forty-fourth Street. Billy now leaned over that parapet, looked down at all the people moving hither and yon. They were jerky little scissors. They were a lot of fun.
    It was a chilly night, and Billy came indoors after a while, closed the French doors. Closing those doors reminded him of his honeymoon. There had been French doors on the Cape Ann love nest of his honeymoon, still were, always would be.
    Billy turned on his television set checking its channel selector around and around. He was looking for programs on which he might be allowed to appear. But it was too early in the evening for programs that allowed people with peculiar opinions to speak out. It was only a little after eight o'clock, so all the shows were about silliness or murder. So it goes.

    Billy left his room, went down the slow elevator, walked over to Times Square, looked into the window of a tawdry bookstore. In the window were hundreds of books about fucking and buggery and murder, and a street guide to New York City, and a model of the Statue of Liberty with a thermometer on it. Also in the window, speckled with soot and fly shit, were four paperback novels by Billy's friend, Kilgore Trout.
    The news of the day, meanwhile, was being written in a ribbon of lights on a building to Billy's back. The window reflected the news. It was about power and sports and anger and death. So it goes.
    Billy went into the bookstore.

    A sign in there said that adults only were allowed in the back. There were peep shows in the back that showed movies of young women and men with no clothes on. It cost a quarter to look into a machine for one minute. There were still photographs of naked young people for sale back there, too. You could take those home. The stills were a lot more Tralfamadorian than the movies, since you could look at them whenever you wanted to, and they wouldn't change. Twenty years in the future, those girls would still be young, would still be smiling or smoldering or simply looking stupid, with their legs wide open. Some of them were eating lollipops or bananas. They would still be eating those. And the peckers of the young men would still be semi-erect, and their muscles would be bulging like cannonballs.
    But Billy Pilgrim wasn't beguiled by the back of the store. He was thrilled by the Kilgore Trout novels in the front. The tides were all new to him, or he thought they were. Now he opened one. It seemed all right for him to do that. Everybody else in the store was pawing things. The name of the book was The Big Board. He got a few paragraphs into it, and then realized that he had read it before-years ago, in the veterans' hospital. It was about an Earthling man and woman who were kidnapped by extra-terrestrials. They were put on display in a zoo on a planet called Zircon-212.

    These fictitious people in the zoo had a big board supposedly showing stock market, quotations and commodity prices along one wall of their habitat, and a news ticker, and a telephone that was supposedly connected to a brokerage on Earth. The creatures on Zircon-212 told their captives that they had invested a million dollars for them back on Earth, and that it was up to the captives to manage it so that they would be fabulously wealthy when they returned to Earth.
    The telephone and the big board and the ticker were all fakes, of -course. They were simply stimulants to make the Earthlings perform vividly for the crowds at the zoo- to make them jump up and down and cheer, or gloat, or sulk, or tear their hair, to be scared shitless or to feel as contented as babies in their mothers' arms.
    The Earthlings did very well on paper. That was part of the rigging, of course. And religion got mixed up in it, too. The news ticker reminded them that the President of the United States had declared National Prayer Week, and that everybody should pray. The Earthlings had had a bad week on the market before that. They had lost a small fortune in olive oil futures. So they gave praying a whirl.
    It worked. Olive oil went up.

    Another Kilgore Trout book there in the window was about a man who built a time machine so he could go back and see Jesus. It worked, and he saw Jesus when Jesus was only twelve years old. Jesus was learning the carpentry trade from his father.
    Two Roman soldiers came into the shop with a mechanical drawing on papyrus of a device they wanted built by sunrise the next morning. It was a cross to be used in the execution of a rabble-rouser.
    Jesus and his father built it. They were glad to have the work. And the rabble-rouser was executed on it.
    So it goes.

    The bookstore was run by seeming quintuplets, by five short, bald men chewing unfit cigars that were sopping wet. They never smiled, and each one had a stool to perch on. They were making money running a paper-and-celluloid whorehouse.
    They didn't have hard-ons. Neither did Billy Pilgrim. Everybody else did. It was a ridiculous store, all about love and babies.
    The clerks occasionally told somebody to buy or get out, not to just look and look and look and paw and paw. Some of the people were looking at each other instead of the merchandise.
    A clerk came up to Billy and told him the good stuff was in the back, that the books Billy was reading were window dressing. 'That ain't what you want, for Christ's sake,' he told Billy 'What you want's in back.'
    So Billy moved a little farther back, but not as far as the part for adults only. He moved because of absentminded politeness, taking a Trout book with him-the one about Jesus and the time machine.
    The time-traveler in the book went back to Bible times to find out one thing in particular: Whether or not Jesus had really died on the cross, or whether he had been taken down while still alive, whether he had really gone on living. The hero had a stethoscope along.
    Billy skipped to the end of the book, where the hero mingled with the people who were taking Jesus down from the cross. The time-traveler was the first one up the ladder, dressed in clothes of the period, and he leaned close to Jesus so people couldn't see him use the stethoscope, and he listened.
    There wasn't a sound inside the emaciated chest cavity. The Son of God was as dead as a doornail.
    So it goes.
    The time-traveler, whose name was Lance Corwin, also got to measure the length of Jesus, but not to weigh him. Jesus was five feet and three and a half inches long.

    Another clerk came up to Billy and asked him if he was going to buy the book or not, and Billy said that he wanted to buy it, please. He had his back to a rack of paperback books about oral-genital contacts from ancient Egypt to the present and so on, and the clerk supposed Billy was reading one of these. So he was startled when he saw what Billy's book was. He said, 'Jesus Christ, where did you find this thing?' and so on, and he had to tell the other clerks about the pervert who wanted to buy the window dressing. The other clerks already knew about Billy. They had been watching him, too.
    The cash register where Billy waited for his change was near a bin of old girly magazines. Billy looked at one out of the corner of his eye, and he saw this question on its cover: What really became of Montana Wildhack?

    So Billy read it. He knew where Montana Wildhack really was, of course. She was back on Tralfamadore, taking care of the baby, but the magazine, which was called Midnight Pussycats, promised that she was wearing a cement overcoat under fathoms of saltwater in San Pedro Bay.
    So it goes.
    Billy wanted to laugh. The magazine., which was published for lonesome men to jerk off to, ran the story so it could print pictures taken from blue movies which Montana had made as a teenagers Billy did not look closely at these. They were grainy things, soot and chalk. They could have been anybody.
    Billy was again directed to the back of the store and he went this time. A jaded sailor stepped away from a movie machine while the film was still running. Billy looked in, and there was Montana Wildhack alone on a bed, peeling a banana. The picture clicked off. Billy did not want to see what happened next, and a clerk importuned him to come over and see some really hot stuff they kept under the counter for connoisseurs.
    Billy was mildly curious as to what could possibly have been kept hidden in such a place. The clerk leered and showed him. It was a photograph of a woman and a Shetland pony. They were attempting to have sexual intercourse between two Doric columns, in front of velvet draperies which were fringed with deedlee-balls.

    Billy didn't get onto television in New York that night., but he did get onto a radio talk show. There was a radio station right next to Billy's hotel. He saw its call letters over the entrance of an office building, so he went in. He went up to the studio on an automatic elevator, and there were other people up there, waiting to go in. They were literary critics, and they thought Billy was one, too. They were going to discuss whether the novel was dead or not. So it goes.
    Billy took his seat with the others around a golden oak table, with a microphone all his own. The master of ceremonies asked him his name and what paper he was from. Billy said he was from the Ilium Gazette.
    He was nervous and happy. 'If you're ever in Cody, Wyoming,' he told himself, 'just ask for Wild Bob.'

    Billy put his hand up at the very first part of the program but he wasn't called on right away. Others got in ahead of him. One of them said that it would be a nice time to bury the novel, now that a Virginian, one hundred years after Appomattox, had written Uncle Tom's Cabin. Another one said that people couldn't read well enough anymore to turn print into exciting situations in their skulls, so that authors had to do what Norman Mailer did, which was to perform in public what he had written. The master of ceremonies asked people to say what they thought the function of the novel might be in modem society, and one critic said, 'To provide touches of color in rooms with all-white wars.' Another one said, 'To describe blow-jobs artistically.' Another one said, 'To teach wives of junior executives what to buy next and how to act in a French restaurant.'
    And then Billy was allowed to speak. Off he went, in that beautifully trained voice of his, telling about the flying saucers and Montana Wildhack and so on.
    He was gently expelled from the studio during a commercial. He went back to his hotel room, put a quarter into the Magic Fingers machine connected to his bed, and he went to sleep. He traveled in time back to Tralfamadore.
    'Time-traveling again?' said Montana. It was artificial evening in the dome. She was breast-feeding their child.
    'Hmm?' said Billy.
    'You've been time-traveling again. I can always tell.'
    'Um.'
    'Where did you go this time? It wasn't the war. I can tell that, too. '
    'New York.'
    'The Big Apple.'
    'Hm?'
    'That's what they used to call New York.'
    "Oh.'
    'You see any plays or movies?'
    'No-I walked around Times Square some, bought a book by Kilgore Trout.'
    'Lucky you.' She did not share his enthusiasm for Kilgore Trout.
    Billy mentioned casually that he had seen part of a blue movie she had made. Her response was no less casual. It was Tralfamadorian and guilt-free:
    'Yes-' she said, 'and I've heard about you in the war, about what a clown you were. And I've heard about the high school teacher who was shot. He made a blue movie with a firing squad.' She moved the baby from one breast to the other, because the moment was so structured that she had to do so.
    There was a silence.
    'They're playing with the clocks again,' said Montana, rising, preparing to put the baby into its crib. She meant that their keepers were making the electric clocks in the dome go fast, then slow, then fast again., and watching the little Earthling family through peepholes.
    There was a silver chain around Montana Wildhack's neck. Hanging from it, between her breasts, was a locket containing a photograph of her alcoholic mother-grainy thing, soot and chalk. It could have been anybody. Engraved on the outside of the locket were these words:

GOD GRANT ME THE SERENITY
TO ACCEPT THE THINGS I
CANNOT CHANGE, COURAGE
TO CHANGE THE THINGS
I CAN, AND WISDOM
ALWAYS TO TELL THE
DIFFERENCE.

Ten

Robert Kennedy, whose summer home is eight miles from the home I live in all year round, was shot two nights ago. He died last night. So it goes.
    Martin Luther King was shot a month ago. He died, too. So it goes.
    And every day my Government gives me a count of corpses created by military science in Vietnam. So it goes.
    My father died many years ago now-of natural causes. So it goes. He was a sweet man. He was a gun nut, too. He left me his guns. They rust.

    On Tralfamadore, says Billy Pilgrim, there isn't much interest in Jesus Christ. The Earthling figure who is most engaging to the Tralfamadorian mind, he says, is Charles Darwin-who taught that those who die are meant to die, that corpses are improvements. So it goes.

    The same general idea appears in The Big Board by Kilgore Trout. The flying saucer creatures who capture Trout's hem ask him about Darwin. They also ask him about golf.

    If what Billy Pilgrim learned from the Tralfamadorians is true, that we will all live forever, no matter how dead we may sometimes seem to be, I am not overjoyed. Still-if I am going to spend eternity visiting this moment and that, I'm grateful that so many of those moments are nice.
    One of the nicest ones in recent times was on my trip back to Dresden with my old war buddy, O'Hare.
    We took a Hungarian Airlines plane from East Berlin. The pilot had a handlebar mustache. He looked like Adolph Menjou. He smoked a Cuban cigar while the plane was being fueled. When we took off, there was no talk of fastening seat belts.
    When we were up in the air, a young steward served us rye bread and salami and butter and cheese and white wine. The folding tray in front of me would not open out. The steward went into the cockpit for a tool, came back with a beer-can opener. He used it to pry out the tray.
    There were only six other passengers. They spoke many languages. They were having nice times, too. East Germany was down below, and the lights were on. I imagined dropping bombs on those lights, those villages and cities and towns.

    O'Hare and I had never expected to make any money-and here we were now, extremely well-to-do.
    'If you're ever in Cody, Wyoming,' I said to him lazily, 'just ask for Wild Bob.'

    O'Hare had a little notebook with him, and printed in the back of it were postal rates and airline distances and the altitudes of famous mountains and other key facts about the world. He was looking up the population of Dresden, which wasn't in the notebook, when he came across this, which he gave me to read:
    On an average, 324,000 new babies are born into the world every day. During that same day, 10,000 persons, in an average, will have starved to death or died from malnutrition. So it goes. In addition, 123,000 persons will die for other reasons. So it goes. This leaves a net gain of about 191,000 each day in the world. The Population Reference Bureau predicts that the world's total population will double to 7,000,000,000 before the year 2000.
    'I suppose they will all want dignity,' I said.
    'I suppose,' said O'Hare.

    Billy Pilgrim was meanwhile traveling back to Dresden, too, but not in the present. He was going back there in 1945, two days after the city was destroyed. Now Billy and the rest were being marched into the ruins by their guards. I was there. O'Hare was there. We had spent the past two nights in the blind innkeeper's stable. Authorities had found us there. They told us what to do. We were to borrow picks and shovels and crowbars and wheelbarrows from our neighbors. We were to march with these implements to such and such a place in the ruins, ready to go to work.

    There were cades on the main roads leading into the ruins. Germans were stopped there. They were not permitted to explore the moon.
    Prisoners of war from many lands came together that morning at such and such a place in Dresden. It had been decreed that here was where the digging for bodies was to begin. So the digging began.

    Billy found himself paired as a digger with a Maori, who had been captured at Tobruk. The Maori was chocolate brown. He had whirlpools tattooed on his forehead and his cheeks. Billy and the Maori dug into the inert, unpromising gravel of the moon. The materials were loose, so there were constant little avalanches.
    Many holes were dug at once. Nobody knew yet what there was to find. Most holes came to nothing-to pavement, or to boulders so huge they would not move. There was no
machinery. Not even horses or mules or oxen could cross the moonscape.
    And Billy and the Maori and others helping them with their particular hole came at last to a membrane of timbers laced over rocks which had wedged together to form an accidental dome. They made a hole in the membrane. There was darkness and space under there.
    A German soldier with a flashlight went down into the darkness, was gone a long time. When he finally came back, he told a superior on the rim of the hole that there were dozens of bodies down there. They were sitting on benches. They were unmarked.
    So it goes.
    The superior said that the opening in the membrane should be enlarged, and that a ladder should be put in the hole, so that bodies could be carried out. Thus began the first corpse mine in Dresden.

    There were hundreds of corpse mines operating by and by. They didn't smell bad at first, were wax museums. But then the bodies rotted and liquefied, and the stink was like roses and mustard gas.
    So it goes.
    The Maori Billy had worked with died of the dry heaves, after having been ordered to go down in that stink and work. He tore himself to pieces, throwing up and throwing up.
    So it goes.
    So a new technique was devised. Bodies weren't brought up any more. They were cremated by soldiers with flamethrowers right where they were. The soldiers. stood outside the shelters, simply sent the fire in.
    Somewhere in there the poor old high school teacher, Edgar Derby, was caught with a teapot he had taken from the catacombs. He was arrested for plundering. He was tried and shot.
    So it goes.

And somewhere in there was springtime. The corpse mines were closed down. The soldiers all left to fight the Russians. In the suburbs, the women and children dug rifle pits. Billy and the rest of his group were locked up in the stable in the suburbs. And then, one morning, they got up to discover that the door was unlocked. The Second World War in Europe was over.
    Billy and the rest wandered out onto the shady street. The trees were leafing out. There was nothing going on out there, no traffic of any kind. There was only one vehicle, an abandoned wagon drawn by two horses. The wagon was green and coffin-shaped.
Birds were talking.
    One bird said to Billy Pilgrim, 'Poo-tee-weet?' rvore